                                                                  st
                                 Macroeconomics for the 21 Century
                                                 Roland Clarke1
                                                December 4, 2025
             1Roland Clarke is an independent researcher and may be contacted at rolandclarke97@icloud.com
                 Contents
                 1 Introduction                                                                                             3
                     1.1  Main objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     3
                     1.2  Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
                 2 Abrief summary of macroeconomic policy from 1930                                                         6
                     2.1  Macroeconomic policy in the early 20th century . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          6
                     2.2  The collapse of the 1930s and beginnings of macroeconomic policy . . . . . . . . . .              6
                     2.3  The dominance of ﬁscal policy to 1970 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         6
                     2.4  The crisis of policy making in the 1970s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7
                          2.4.1   Acceleration of inﬂation in the 1970s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8
                          2.4.2   The diﬃcult political economy of ﬁscal policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         8
                     2.5  The dominance of monetary policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8
                          2.5.1   Theoretical and historical origins of monetarism        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
                          2.5.2   Monetarism in practice      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
                          2.5.3   How does monetary policy work? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         10
                     2.6  The global ﬁnancial crisis and the era of ultra-low interest rates . . . . . . . . . . . .       11
                          2.6.1   Secular stagnation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11
                     2.7  Covid, ﬁscal expansion and supply side bottlenecks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         12
                 3 The theory and narrative of current macroeconomic policy                                               13
                     3.1  Optimising consumers and the Euler equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          13
                     3.2  Determination of relative prices and wages through given preferences and technology              15
                     3.3  The triumph of monetarism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        15
                     3.4  The natural rate of unemployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         15
                     3.5  The ‘equilibrium’ rate of interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     15
                 4 Behavioral micro-foundations for macroeconomic policy                                                  16
                     4.1  Reasonable, non-optimising consumers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         16
                          4.1.1   Low income earners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
                          4.1.2   Middle income earners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16
                          4.1.3   Very high income earners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17
                                  4.1.3.1    The demand for ﬁnancial assets       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
                     4.2  Consumption determined by hierarchy of needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           20
                     4.3  The insigniﬁcance of interest rates for consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
                     4.4  Beyond proﬁt maximising ﬁrms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         20
                          4.4.1   Pricing policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
                     4.5  Ataxonomy of inﬂation - a return to ﬁrst principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          20
                                                                      1
                CONTENTS                                                                                                 2
                    4.6   Atheory of inﬂation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
                          4.6.1   Investment decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
                          4.6.2   Inﬂuence of interest rates on investment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
                5 Alternative theories of the role of the rate of interest                                              22
                    5.1   Abrief history of theories of the interest rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   23
                          5.1.1   Liquidity preference and loanable funds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
                    5.2   Interest as an expression of time preference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    25
                    5.3   The rate of interest and the return to capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    25
                    5.4   Equilibration of savings and investment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
                          5.4.1   Whyare investment and savings rates low in some countries? . . . . . . . . .          27
                          5.4.2   The quality of investment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   29
                          5.4.3   The determination of the rate of growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     30
                    5.5   Determination of the long term interest rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    30
                    5.6   Does there exist an equilibrium rate of interest? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   30
                    5.7   The weight of false narratives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  31
                    5.8   AKeynesian-Behavioural theory of the rate of interest for the 21st century . . . . . .        31
                          5.8.1   Separating interest rates from time-preference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    31
                          5.8.2   The weak link between interest rates and the accumulation of capital . . . . .        31
                          5.8.3   Interest rates and demand management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31
                6 Abehavioural approach to ﬁscal policy                                                                 32
                                  6.0.0.1   Alternative Policy Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     33
                7 Abehavioural approach to monetary policy                                                              34
                Chapter 1
                Introduction
                1.1     Main objectives
                This book re-examines the basis of current macro-economic policy making and attempts to establish
                                                                                                   1
                new micro-foundations bringing together some elements of the work of Keynes and a behavioural
                approach to economic theory and policy. When we discuss the work of Keynes we are not refer-
                ring simply to the idea of ﬁscal policy for demand management, as Keynesian theory came to be
                characterised in the post-war period. Rather we focus on the central insights of his work in The
                General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (Keynes 1936) as well as the follow up articles
                to the General Theory, ‘The General Theory of Employment’, ‘The “ex-ante” Theory of the Rate
                of Interest’, ‘Alternative Theories of the Rate of Interest’ Keynes (1937a, 1937b, 1937c) and, most
                importantly, How to Pay for the War Keynes (1940). The central insights of Keynes were that:
                  (a) There is no automatic adjustment mechanism in a market economy ensuring that it will return
                      quickly to a full employment equilibrium (even if all prices and wages are fully ﬂexible).
                  (b) Consumption and investment decisions are often made under conditions of pure uncertainty,
                      where there is no rational basis for the decision and therefore may be the result of hopes, fears
                      and imagined futures which have no basis in objective reality.
                  (c) Savings and investment are equilibrated by changes in investment, not interest rates.
                  (d) Long term interest rates are determined by the desire for liquidity and expectations about the
                      future.
                These insights have largely been lost from contemporary macroeconomic theory and policy, for
                reasons which will be discussed in future chapters. These insights are also very compatible with
                behavioural economics, and particularly the strand of behavioural economics referred to by Earl
                (2022) and Sent (2004) as the ‘Old Behavioural Economics’. Old Behavioural Economics is derived
                from the work of Simon (1955, 1956, 1979, 1991, 1996) and also includes the work on the theory of
                the ﬁrm such as Hall and Hitch (1939), Cyert and March (1963) and Richardson (1953, 1959, 1960).
                Simon recognised that the central axiom of economic theory (and policy), that decisions made by
                people and ﬁrms to rationally maximise utility or proﬁts was an impossibility. It was impossible
                1It should be emphasised that the focus of this work is neither to discuss ‘what Keynes really meant’, nor to suggest that
                 the work of Keynes is without error. There are however, a number of central, and almost self-evident, propositions in
                 his work which have not been incorporated into the body of modern macroeconomic theory, because they undermine
                 either the axioms or the overall vision of modern macroeconomic theory.
                                                                   3
               CHAPTER1. INTRODUCTION                                                                     4
               bothbecause the information required does not, and often could not possibly exist, and furthermore
               even if the information were to exist, humans do not have the cognitive capacity to process it all and
               (as orthodox economic theory assumes) examine all possible alternatives before taking a decision.
               He also developed an alternative decision theory, rooted in empirical work in psychology.
               Among the most important consequences of his work was the idea that consumers could not be
               maximising intertemporal utility, using interest rates to discount future costs and beneﬁts. Indeed,
               as will be seen in later chapters, there is a wealth of empirical evidence suggesting that individuals
               do not, and cannot apply consistent discount factors to the future and take decisions maximising
               intertemporal utility. In practice this means that the choice of what goods and services to consume,
               and how much to consume and to save, will be dominated by a few rules which produce satisfactory
               (but not optimal) outcomes. Simon referred to such decision rules as procedural rationality, as
               opposedtothesubstantive rationality of orthodox economics. It will beseen that the way individuals
               develop such rules means that their decisions may be very diﬀerent those that would have resulted
               from intertemporal utility maximisation.
               Cyert and March, Richardson and others applied these insights to the theory of the ﬁrm, and again
               demonstrated that ﬁrms cannot simply maximise proﬁts because the information and knowledge
               required simply do not exist. The ﬁrms have to use policies and procedures which produce sat-
               isfactory results. It is impossible to know whether these would have been optimal. This applies
               particularly when developing new products or opening new markets. Demand curves and marginal
               costs are unknown in such cases, and will change with as the product enters a new market. New
               investment is inevitably a question of taking a decision under extreme uncertainty and with very
               little reliable knowledge. As Keynes (1936) says:
                    “The outstanding fact is the extreme precariousness of the basis of knowledge on which
                    our estimates of prospective yield have to be made.  Our knowledge of the factors
                    which will govern the yield of an investment some years hence is usually very slight
                    and often negligible. If we speak frankly, we have to admit that our basis of knowledge
                    for estimating the yield ten years hence of a railway, a copper mine, a textile factory,
                    the goodwill of a patent medicine, an Atlantic liner, a building in the City of London
                    amounts to little and sometimes to nothing; or even ﬁve years hence.”
               In the modern context we could just as well argue that we have little or no idea about the changes to
               the economy and society of the widespread adoption of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, how electric battery
               technology will evolve, whether USA will have become an inward looking authoritarian regime
               isolated from the rest of the world, or whether there will be further major wars over the next
               ten years. All of these will have enormous impacts on the return of investments, and we have no
               knowledge of the probabilities of these events nor of their impact on economy and society. One of
               the central themes of this book is that the returns to investment in physical capital are extremely
               uncertain, and so the model in which entrepreneurs compare ‘the interest rate’ to the returns to
               investment to determine whether it is viable, may be of limited use in explaining levels of investment.
               This article looks at both the technical and political economy aspects of ﬁscal and monetary policy
               to understand how and why this transformation took place. It is argued that the use of monetary
               policy as the principal instrument to control inﬂation, is technically ﬂawed while the experience of
               monetary policy over the past 30 or so years shows how the political economy issues that led to the
               decline of ﬁscal policy as the main instrument of demand management can now be overcome, so as
               to achieve eﬀective macroeconomic management, consistent with a dynamic and fair economy.
           CHAPTER1. INTRODUCTION                                              5
           1.2  Methodology
                Chapter 2
                Abrief summary of macroeconomic
                policy from 1930
                2.1     Macroeconomic policy in the early 20th century
                Prior to the 1930’s it is diﬃcult to talk about ‘Macroeconomic policy’ as such. Government spending
                was relatively low and concentrated on administration and defence. Taxes were raised to ﬁnance
                government spending, and, exceptionally, particularly during wartime, ﬁscal deﬁcits were ﬁnanced
                by the issue of bonds. Monetary policy was largely conﬁned to moving interest rates occasionally
                in response to inﬂows or outﬂows of gold as most of the world was on the Gold Standard from
                                          th
                the last quarter of the 19   century. The prevailing view among both academics and governments
                was that the economy was self regulating, and although ﬂuctuations were observed with periods of
                both inﬂation and deﬂation, these were held to be self-correcting, with the gold standard providing
                stability for international trade. Prior to 1914 there was an unprecedented process of globalisation
                and a general belief that major wars would be impossible due to the economic and trade links
                between countries.
                2.2     The collapse of the 1930s and beginnings of macroeconomic
                        policy
                Fiscal management of demand can said to have begun (in a piecemeal fashion) with Roosevelt’s
                New Deal in the US which supported programs of public works to alleviate unemployment in the
                Great Depression. It was given a theoretical basis with the publication of Keynes’ General Theory
                of Employment, Interest and Money (Keynes 1936), which together with the practical experience of
                the wartime management of the US and UK economies in the 1940’s, formed the basis for post-war
                macroeconomic management from 1945 to the mid 1970’s.
                2.3     The dominance of ﬁscal policy to 1970
                From the late 1930’s, with the combination of the great depression and Keynes critique of orthodox
                classical economics, it was broadly accepted by policy makers that ﬁscal policy had a central role in
                the management of aggregate demand. This consensus began to break down in the 1960’s and it is
                probably fair to say that for most of the last forty years monetary policy (with a few exceptions) has
                                                                  6
         CHAPTER2. ABRIEFSUMMARYOFMACROECONOMICPOLICYFROM1930       7
         been accepted as the only legitimate instrument for the management of demand, and thus inﬂation,
         in most countries.
         Initial attempts to use monetary policy to manage demand in the late 1970s and early 1980s, used
         a crude (and ineﬀective) monetarist interpretation of the link between the ‘money supply’ and the
         price level, as a means to controlling inﬂation. Early attempts at monetary base control showed
         that the link between monetary aggregates and inﬂation was tenuous and unpredictable. However,
         the experience did demonstrate that suﬃciently high interest rates could depress economic activity
         suﬃciently to eventually eliminate inﬂation (particularly when combined with institutional changes
         to weaken workers bargaining power), although at the cost of high unemployment and lost output.
         Although ﬁscal policy was the dominant instrument of macroeconomic management in the post-
         war period, it was supplemented by monetary policy, often in the form of direct controls on bank
         lending, or the conditions of consumer credit. In the period of ﬁxed exchange rates until 1973, the
         interest rate was used more for managing foreign exchange ﬂows, to maintain the ﬁxed exchange
         rate, than to directly control inﬂation.
         The eﬀectiveness of ﬁscal policy (and wartime spending) in creating full employment led to the
         consensus that full employment should be one of the central objectives of economic policy in the vast
         majority of market economies. There were also instruments and models including the crude IS-LM
         framework, which (falsely) claimed to be a formal version of Keynes theoretical work, together with
         the apparently strong empirical inverse relationship between unemployment and inﬂation formalised
         as the Phillips Curve (Phillips 1958). These instruments and models created the belief amongst
         macroeconomicpolicymakersthatmaintainingfullemploymentwaspossible, andarelatively simple
         technical matter of ﬁne-tuning ﬁscal policy to boost demand if unemployment were to rise and to
         reduce demand when inﬂation rose.
         2.4  The crisis of policy making in the 1970s
         From 1945 until about 1970 macroeconomic management in OECD countries appeared to have
         achieved full employment with steady growth and low (but gradually increasing) inﬂation. During
         this period average inﬂation in the US, the UK, France and Japan was xx, yy, zz, ww, respectively
         while unemployment rates were of the order of 3% - 4%. There is little doubt that this period was
         probably the most successful in terms of crisis-free, sustained positive macroeconomic results for
         most western industrialised countries that had ever been observed.
         Strains in the system were however manifesting themselves. The policy focus was on maintaining
         full employment, but the Phillips curve trade-oﬀ which had been previous identiﬁed between the
         rate of unemployment and the level of inﬂation appeared to be breaking down, so that from the mid
         1960’s inﬂation levels associated with a given level of unemployed resources was gradually rising.
         Moreover, the world ﬁnancial system was eﬀectively on a US dollar standard, with US dollars being
         the principal reserve currency for all other countries. Expansionary ﬁscal policy in the US, designed
         both to generated full employment and ﬁnance the Vietnam war, meant that there was eﬀectively
         a surplus of dollars in the rest of the world. The anchor of the Bretton Woods world ﬁnancial
         system was the dollar which had a value ﬁxed, and was freely convertible to gold, held in reserve by
         the US Treasury. Diﬀering ﬁscal policies and inﬂation rates among the large industrial economies,
         meant that disequilibria were transmitted into the balance of payments, with deﬁcit countries under
         pressure to tighten policy in order to correct the external disequilibrium.
         This pressure, however, did not apply to the US. Its balance of payments deﬁcit (dollar surplus)
             CHAPTER2. ABRIEFSUMMARYOFMACROECONOMICPOLICYFROM1930                                 8
             simply translated into increases in dollar reserves held by other countries. This came to be known
             as the ‘exorbitant privilege’ of the US. The system could only be stable as long as the link between
             the dollar and gold was credible. From the mid sixties this credibility began to be tested by Central
             Banks, particularly in Europe, which began increasing, their holdings of gold, by exchanging dollars
             for gold. As US gold reserves diminished, it was clear that something would have to give. In the end
             the US simply suspended the convertibility of dollars to gold, thus eﬀectively ending the Bretton
             Woods system and ushering in the system of ﬂoating exchange rates.
             2.4.1   Acceleration of inﬂation in the 1970s
             The collapse of the Bretton Woods system in 1971 was followed very quickly by a sharp increase
             in world commodity prices (particularly oil which quadrupled in price in 1973 and further tripled
             in price from 1979 to 1981). These price increases came on top of an inﬂation rate which had
             gradually increased in the previous decades. The result was that inﬂation increased rapidly, peaking
             in 1974 or 1975 in most countries as the external supply shock fed into domestic inﬂation. Policy
             responses were varied and often incoherent. In the UK for example, in 1973 ﬁscal policy became
             more expansionary, while subsequent inﬂation was dealt with by an (ineﬀective) wage control policy
             which quickly broke down. In the US the break with Bretton Woods was also combined with the
             announcement of a wage and price freeze. In most cases direct controls on wages and prices proved
             to be at best temporary palliatives.
             2.4.2   The diﬃcult political economy of ﬁscal policy
             While ﬁscal policy could potentially be very eﬀective for the management of aggregate demand
             from a technical perspective, the political economy of ﬁscal management proved to be too complex,
             in the sense that increases in expenditure (or reductions in taxation) to stimulate growth or oﬀset
             an increase in unemployment were politically very diﬃcult to reverse once the economy began to
             overheat. Thus, in practice, building in a bias towards expansionary ﬁscal policy which would
             only be confronted once a crisis was generated through accelerating inﬂation and/or a balance of
             payments collapse.
             2.5    The dominance of monetary policy
             Thisled to the development of a consensus from the late 1980’s that the only appropriate instrument
             to regulate demand was monetary policy (focused particularly on the use of short term interest
             rates to inﬂuence the entire yield curve through expectations), while ﬁscal policy was relegated to
             service delivery and maintaining a ‘sustainable’ debt burden. By the 1990’s, in many countries,
             this became formalised in the form of inﬂation targeting regimes, managed by independent Central
             Banks. This historical evolution is described in detail in the UK Treasury’s semi-oﬃcial account
             of macroeconomic policy making (Balls and O’Donnell 2002), and in the US by Ben Bernanke’s
             analysis of monetary policy (Bernanke (2022)).
             2.5.1   Theoretical and historical origins of monetarism
             Behind the rise of monetary policy as the dominant macroeconomic policy instrument was the
             fundamental notion that relative prices were determined only by ‘real factors’ (technology and
             preferences) from the solution of innumerableoptimisation problemsbyindividualagents resulting in
             a vector of ‘objective’ equilibrium prices, while the price level was determined by the ‘money supply’
                CHAPTER2. ABRIEFSUMMARYOFMACROECONOMICPOLICYFROM1930                                                    9
                (the ‘Classical dichotomy’). Although never demonstrated empirically, the ‘Classical Dichotomy’
                became as central to macroeconomic thought as it had been in the 19th and early 20th centuries,
                and indeed has been highly inﬂuential in theoretical and policy discussions up to the present.
                Thisviewrelies upon the idea that ‘money’ as a means of exchange can be clearly distinguished from
                other ﬁnancial assets which constitute a store of future purchasing power.1 The idea that ‘money’
                (as opposed to other ﬁnancial assets) has no utility in itself and is simply held for transactions
                purposes is the central assumption of the reformulation of the doctrine of monetarism by Milton
                Friedman in (Friedman 1956, 1969) (both reprinted in Friedman (2006)).
                Although the idea that the money supply (however deﬁned) is a principal determinant of the price
                level dates back at least to the eighteenth century,2 it was articulated in its modern form in the
                1950s by Milton Friedman. Friedman argued strongly that excessive growth of the money supply
                was the only cause of inﬂation, and that in policy terms the only solution to excessive price growth
                was to restrain the growth of the ‘money supply’. In the 1950’s and most of the 1960’s monetarism
                was treated as a fringe doctrine which could not challenge the prevailing dominance of ﬁscal policy
                and the Keynesian orthodoxy of the time. However, by the end of the 1960’s, it began to gain in
                credibility in academic circles, as it became clear that ﬁscal policy was apparently unable to stabilise
                the economy and ensure full employment with low inﬂation.
                During the 1970’s monetarism gradually became the orthodoxy for macroeconomic policy making,
                almost by default, as the combination of rising inﬂation with economic stagnation and rising unem-
                ployment appeared to be intractable using the traditional instruments of ﬁscal policy, sometimes
                combined with wage and price controls.
                Monetarism appeared to both provide a shortcut to the control of inﬂation, as well as an ideological
                framework for a reduction of state intervention in the economy. It began to be adopted in a soft
                form in the UK following the balance of payments crisis of 1976 and in a much more ideologically
                pure fashion with election of Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister in 1979 (see Lankester (2024)
                for a detailed account of the UK experience). In the US monetarism as a policy doctrine came
                to the fore with the appointment of Paul Volker as Chairman of the Federal Reserve in 1979 (see
                Bernanke (2022)).
                2.5.2    Monetarism in practice
                With its ascendancy in the UK and the US quickly began to dominate economic policy making
                and theorising in most OECD countries and, as a result of its diﬀusion through multilateral ﬁ-
                nancial institutions, and their regional equivalents, to much of the developing world. The appeal
                of monetarism was not simply the apparent simplicity of its policy recommendations (controlling
                the money supply in order to control inﬂation), but also that it provided a theoretical basis for
                concepts such as the ‘Natural Rate of Unemployment’(Friedman 1968) (or as it was later called, the
                ‘Non-Accelerating Inﬂation Rate of Unemployment’). This concept provided a rationale for arguing
                that the government had no role in trying to regulate the level of unemployment, since it would
                automatically move to its natural rate which Friedman argued would be the level:
                      “ground out by the Walrasian system of general equilibrium equations, provided there
                      is embedded in them the actual structural characteristics of the labor and commodity
                      markets, including market imperfections, stochastic variability in demands and supplies,
                1It is the existence of this wide range of ﬁnancial assets which often led to endless and ultimately futile debates on
                 the correct deﬁnition of ‘money’ for the purposes of controlling the money supply and thus inﬂation.
                2See, for example, the work of David Hume
                CHAPTER2. ABRIEFSUMMARYOFMACROECONOMICPOLICYFROM1930                                                  10
                      the cost of gathering information about job vacancies and labor availabilities, the costs
                      of mobility, and so on.”(Friedman 1968)
                In this deﬁnition it is made clear that unemployment will be determined by the interaction of prefer-
                ences and technology, and that if it is higher than is desired the only solutions can be microeconomic
                interventions to help the market to work better, but that there is no macroeconomic policy which
                can lower the rate of unemployment.
                2.5.3    Howdoes monetary policy work?
                Monetary policy (largely through interest rate movements) may have eﬀects on private consumption
                and investment decisions. However, once one removes the axiom of the maximisation of intertem-
                poral utility as the dominant motivation for consumers, the scope for interest rates to aﬀect private
                consumption decisions is considerably diminished. This is consistent with the empirical literature
                [cite sources] on the relatively low elasticity of consumption to interest rates.
                Whether interest rates will aﬀect private consumption signiﬁcantly will depend very much on the
                institutional framework for consumption. In an economy in which a large part of the population
                buys houses on mortgages (particularly variable rate mortgages), there is no doubt that interest
                rates will aﬀect income and consumption, both through the purchase of new housing (which also
                drives a signiﬁcant part of the consumer durable market) and through the income and wealth eﬀects
                on existing borrowers, where a rise in the interest rate will act as a tax on the borrower’s income
                and (over time) reduce the perceived value of assets (such as property). However, those parts of
                the population who are credit constrained (particularly the “poor”, as described above) or holders
                of ﬁnancial assets (largely the “rich” from above) will, in the former case, be insensitive to interest
                rate changes, and in the latter, have a positive income eﬀect for a rise in the interest rate. Thus
                the social and institutional structure will determine if there is any sensitivity of consumption to
                interest rate movements.
                The relationship of physical investment to interest rates is also unlikely to be a smooth monotonic
                function. In the paradigm of the macroeconomic textbooks entrepreneurs have the choice of invest-
                ing in numerous projects with a well deﬁned rate of return (possibly with a well deﬁned variance
                around the expected rate of return). If the expected rate of return (adjusted for risk) exceeds the
                interest rate (and the entrepreneur can secure the necessary capital - from borrowing, equity or own
                resources) the investment is likely to take place.
                Hence, in this approach a fall in the (real) rate of interest will tend to raise the volume of investment,
                while a rise will diminish the volume of investment. There is little doubt that very high real rates
                of interest are eﬀective in curtailing investment, and indeed severe monetary contractions can very
                quickly reduce investment levels, by raising enormously the risk of investment, at a moment when
                demand for ﬁnal output is likely to fall. While the comparison of the relative returns on ﬁnancial
                assets and physical investment may have some eﬀect, there is little doubt that the principal eﬀect
                of raising interest rates is to reduce the expected return of investment, through expected falls in
                aggregate demand. As discussed previously, the likelihood of a very high variance of the rate of
                return on investment (particularly in countries with weak institutional structures), is also likely to
                reduce the elasticity of investment to the rate of interest.
                Low rates of interest, however, may not have symmetric eﬀects. While they may reduce slightly
                the costs of investment, they will not increase expected returns by as much as high rates depress
                expected returns. The experience of ultra-low interest rates from 2008 to 2022 is perhaps the clearest
                illustration of this point.   There has not been an extraordinary investment boom by historical
                CHAPTER2. ABRIEFSUMMARYOFMACROECONOMICPOLICYFROM1930                                                11
                standards. Nor have zero real or nominal rates suddenly made previously unviable investments
                viable, precisely because of the uncertainty over returns. What low interest rates have done is to
                raise asset prices, (property, shares, cryptocurrency, etc.), often purchased using cheap credit to
                                 3
                leverage returns, as wealth holders look for alternative (and often more risky) ﬁnancial assets to
                produce a return, as discussed previously. Over time the rise in asset prices may also contribute
                to raising consumption through wealth eﬀects, at the expense of increasing the risks of reversing
                monetary policy, as evidenced by the economic crises of 2008 and 2022.
                All these considerations suggest that private expenditure on consumption and investment may be
                aﬀected by monetary policy in an uncertain and unpredictable manner. The eﬀects of monetary
                policy will depend upon changing views about the future, of both consumers and investors. They
                are unlikely to be linear or even monotonic. In these circumstances, while it may be possible to
                identify at a speciﬁc moment in time an interest rate which will be consistent with full employment
                of resources at a low inﬂation rate, there will be nothing natural or stable about this interest rate,
                and indeed, in many circumstances it may not exist. There is no reason that a natural interest
                rate should exist once we dispense with the idea that interest rates in some sense reﬂect a trade-oﬀ
                between present and future consumption for consumers engaged in an exercise of intertemporal
                utility maximisation, or that it is related to the real (unknowable) return to physical capital.
                2.6     The global ﬁnancial crisis and the era of ultra-low interest
                        rates
                2.6.1    Secular stagnation
                Overthelast decade there has been considerable discussion of the world entering a period of ‘secular
                stagnation’. The ‘secular stagnation’ hypothesis was ﬁrst introduced to discussions on economic
                policy by Alvin Hansen in an address to the American Economic Association (Hansen 1939). His
                argument was essentially that investment possibilities depended on either population growth or the
                rapid advance of technology, and that the apparent slowdown of technological innovation at the
                same time as a reduced growth of population had led to a fall in the level of investment relative to
                savings. The hypothesis was not borne out by history at the time.
                However, the hypothesis was revived by Larry Summers in 2013 (Summers 2014a, 2014b, 2015)
                following ﬁnancial crisis of 2007–2008, and the observation that despite record low interest rates,
                there appeared to be no revival of inﬂation, while growth of output and employment remained
                modest. Summers (2015) notes that even prior to the 2007–2008 crisis the there was a general view
                that monetary policy had been too easy and that there was a large amount of imprudent borrowing.
                However, this lax monetary policy had not resulted in a great boom, capacity was not under any
                pressure and unemployment was not remarkable low, while inﬂation was well under control. Thus
                his argument was that there had been a secular decline in the ‘neutral’ rate of interest, consistent
                with full employment and low inﬂation, as desired investment had not risen to match desired saving.
                Moreover secular stagnation appeared to be a global phenomenon. Global interest rates had been
                falling since the early 1990s. The surplus of savings over investment in China has manifested itself
                through a sustained current account surplus and build up of foreign reserves. Japan has suﬀered
                from stagnation, deﬂation and negative interest rates for three decades and Europe and the US for
                3This is the essence of Minsky’s Financial Instability Hypothesis, Minsky (1977, 1986) which argues that ﬁnancial
                 crises are not aberrations or due to policy errors, but rather inherent characteristics of capitalist economies with
                 ﬁnancial markets.
         CHAPTER2. ABRIEFSUMMARYOFMACROECONOMICPOLICYFROM1930      12
         at least two decades. Rachel and Summers (2019b) estimate that the world “neutral” real rate of
         interest has fallen by 300 basis points since 1980, but would have fallen by 700 points, had there
         not been signiﬁcant oﬀsets from ﬁscal and social insurance policies.
         Summers (2014b) argues that the phenomenon of secular stagnation raises serious policy dilemmas
         as as it becomes diﬃcult to simultaneously achieve adequate growth, capacity utilisation, and
         ﬁnancial stability. This paper will argue that there is a clear solution to this policy dilemma which
         has been obscured by a misleading narrative on the role of the interest rate in a market economy.
         2.7  Covid, ﬁscal expansion and supply side bottlenecks
                Chapter 3
                The theory and narrative of current
                macroeconomic policy
                3.1     Optimising consumers and the Euler equation
                Most models of consumption and savings are based upon the life cycle hypothesis originally de-
                veloped by Franco Modigliani and collaborators (see for example Modigliani and Brumberg (1954)
                and Modigliani (1966, 1986)). While the life cycle hypothesis, and the related permanent income
                hypothesis, of Friedman (1957)represented considerable advances on previous na¨ıve theories of con-
                sumptionandsaving, and apparently generated insights into questions such as why savings rates are
                                                                                         1
                no higher in rich countries than poor and also why savings will increase in a growing economy (see
                Deaton (2005) for an excellent review), it is explicitly anchored in the paradigm of a typical typical
                rational consumer maximising expected utility over their lifetime. This model, indeed, continues
                to dominate economic theorising (because it is mathematically tractable and taps into deep seated
                                                                                    2
                popular narratives regarding interest rates, saving and investment ), despite the fact that it is well
                established that the optimisation problems required to be solved by consumers are both impossible
                (in behavioural terms) and far from observed reality (see Thaler (1994, 2016)).
                Most theories of consumption which form the micrcofoundations of macroeconomics start with
                the idea of the distribution of consumption through time being an inter-temporal optimisation
                problem for a ‘representative’ household which maximises utility based upon expected income and
                subjective trade-oﬀs between present and future consumption (for example Deaton (1992), Romer
                (2018), Walsh (2017), and Gal´ı (2015)).
                Themodels of consumption in orthodox theories characterise consumption decisions as intertempo-
                ral allocation decisions in which consumers maximise their utility, which is a function of consumption
                in every time period.
                1Although this ﬁnding is widely cited and is technically true, it will be shown in a later section of this paper that
                 growth (due to technical progress or of population) cannot account for observed savings rates in Modigliani style
                 life–cycle models.
                2Theargumentisthattheanalysisoftherelationships betweensavings, investmentandinterest rate hasbeendistorted
                 by what (Shiller 2019, 2021) would term as ‘narratives’. These are powerful stories which subtly inﬂuence theoretical
                 and empirical approaches to the relationship between these key macroeconomic variables. The key stories are i)
                 that interest is the reward for waiting, or for deferring consumption; ii) savings are required for investment and
                 therefore at a macroeconomic level a lack of savings can be constraint to growth and development; iii) the long–run
                 real interest rate is determined by the balance between desired ex–ante saving and desired (ex–ante) investment.
                                                                  13
                CHAPTER3. THETHEORYANDNARRATIVEOFCURRENTMACROECONOMICPOLICY14
                The fundamental argument here is that the canonical optimisation problem for consumers is not
                the one described in most textbooks, in which a consumer maximises utility subject to a budget
                constraint, and from which can be derived the narrative of consumption being inversely related to
                interest rates as summarised below:
                                                          T
                                             max u=Xυ(c) (intertemporal utility)
                                                              t  t
                                                          1
                                                T                    T
                                               X c                  X y
                                 subject to            t    =A +             t     (budget constraint)
                                                          t     1               t
                                                1  (1 +r)             1 (1 +r)
                Rather, the problem faced by individuals is how to minimise the probability that in any time period
                initial assets plus income will be insuﬃcient (or unavailable) to maintain a socially determined min-
                imum level of consumption. Conceptually, this could be characterised as individuals or households
                attempting to hold reserves of assets in order to maintain a minimum level of consumption in the
                event of income shocks (such as unemployment) or expenditure shocks (such as health or social care
                expenditures), as well as accumulating reserves to cover retirement, and or inability to work due to
                disability, suﬃcient to cover probable life expectancy.
                This suggests the need to move from a framework of rational optimisation by homogeneous house-
                holds (which is recognised to be both psychologically and computationally impossible) to a more
                realistic approach in which consumption and saving levels are socially determined and in which
                the psychological objectives of households (the avoidance of loss and destitution and the pursuit of
                power, for both of which there is empirical evidence) are realistic.
                                                                                                                        3
                While there have been many critiques of the “rational” optimisation model of consumer behaviour,
                this has tended to dominate orthodox discourse because of its mathematical tractability, even though
                it has relatively weak empirical support.
                Theoretical and empirical work such as Deaton (1990, 1989),Carroll, Holm, and Kimball (2021),
                Carroll (1997), and Carroll and Summers (1991) and Winter, Schlafmann, and Rodepeter (2012)
                have shown that rational consumer behaviour can be better explained through rules of thumb
                involving the use of buﬀer-stocks over relatively short periods (a few years) to cover unforeseen
                contingencies (particularly unemployment and health emergencies), while making some (often in-
                adequate) provision for later years of life when little or no income will be available. This paper
                proposes an approach in which reasonable assumptions on individual consumption choices based
                upon modern behavioural theories, as opposed to unrealistic optimisation, are used to construct a
                plausible model of macroeconomic variables consistent with observed behaviour, broad consistent
                with the overall life-cycle hypothesis, but removing the assumption of optimisation at the centre of
                the hypothesis.
                In this framework, those households which are able to, save essentially in order to avoid losses or
                destitution, including to provide resources for retirement. What this means in practice is that the
                principal motives for saving are the precautionary motive, whereby savings are needed to cushion
                unexpected falls in income (through unemployment for example), or unexpected expenditures on
                3Among the earliest was the work of Simon (1955), which has very gradually led to the development of a considerable
                 empirical literature, anchored in psychological science which suggests that the rational optimisation model is incon-
                 sistent with the computational abilities of the human mind, and with the actual way in which people take decisions
                 (see for example Tversky and Kahneman (1991), Akerlof (2002), Tversky and Kahneman (1974), Kahneman and
                 Tversky (1979), Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1990), Kahneman (2003b, 2011), and Thaler (1994, 2016, 2018)).
                CHAPTER3. THETHEORYANDNARRATIVEOFCURRENTMACROECONOMICPOLICY15
                accidents and emergencies (particularly for health). It is explicitly recognised that individuals and
                households have little knowledge of the likely pattern of income over their lifetimes, and although
                they recognise that saving is necessary as a precautionary measure and eventually for retirement,
                there is little understanding of how much saving will be required over a life time. It is also recognised
                that in all economies a substantial proportion of the population will be unable to save enough to
                                                    4
                provide for short term emergencies or for retirement.
                3.2     Determination of relative prices and wages through given pref-
                        erences and technology
                3.3     The triumph of monetarism
                3.4     The natural rate of unemployment
                3.5     The ‘equilibrium’ rate of interest
                4Even in the US, the richest country in the world, in 2021, 40 percent of households did not have money set aside
                 for emergencies and would need to borrow, sell assets or draw on other savings to confront a loss of income from
                 employment. 32 percent of households had less than $400 for emergency expenses, while 24 percent had diﬃcultly
                 paying normal monthly bills (Federal Reserve System 2022).
                Chapter 4
                Behavioral micro-foundations for
                macroeconomic policy
                4.1     Reasonable, non-optimising consumers
                In our framework, those households which are able to, save essentially in order to avoid catastrophe
                or destitution, including to provide resources for retirement, or to accumulate political and social
                power. What this means in practice is that the principal motives for saving are the precautionary
                motive, whereby savings are needed to cushion unexpected falls in income (through unemployment
                for example), or unexpected expenditures on accidents and emergencies (particularly for health),
                and for maintaining consumption during retirement, or for a few, as a means to obtaining and
                maintaining power. It is proposed to extend the framework to include three social groups divided
                broadly by income.
                4.1.1    Low income earners
                                                             1
                Theﬁrstgroupis that of low income earners, in which income is insuﬃcient (or only just suﬃcient)
                for physically and socially necessary consumption.2 Net saving will be close to zero. Even if some
                individuals are temporarily able to make small savings for contingencies, as necessities will be met
                through social and family links, and accumulated savings of one individual will often be called upon
                to meet emergency expenditures of family or friends (see for example Banerjee and Duﬂo (2011,
                Chapter 9)). In the absence (or inadequacy) of public social welfare, those unable to work due to
                unemployment or old age, for example, will also be supported by family or informal social networks.
                4.1.2    Middle income earners
                The second group is that of middle income earners who generally have suﬃcient resources for basic
                necessities but has to plan and save for contingencies and retirement, and therefore net savings will
                be dependent on a combination of demographic factors, risk aversity, income levels, and the avail-
                1In addition to low paid workers this group would include unemployed and under–employed households, self–employed
                 (informal sector) as well as very small businesses. The criteria is the relationship of income to consumption needs
                 rather than occupational status.
                2By this is meant suﬃcient resources for all essential needs (such as food, clothing, housing, education and basic
                 health care) as well as minimum contribution to social obligations, including contributions to community and family
                 events and provision of support for extended family confronting emergencies.
                                                                 16
                CHAPTER4. BEHAVIORALMICRO-FOUNDATIONS FOR MACROECONOMICPOLICY17
                ability of public social protection and health services. It is not suggested, however, that households
                in this category will be making impossible decisions to optimise consumption over their lifetimes
                in a radically uncertain world, but rather will be taking reasonable decisions to try and avoid ma-
                jor shocks to their life-style and social standing. This would include having resources available to
                meet moderate contingencies and not being put into the position of losing one’s house, becoming
                bankrupt or having to make major reductions in expenditure over an extended time.
                Thechoice between consumption and saving could be seen as one in which the beneﬁts of immediate
                consumption are weighed against future risks and the security provided by increasing the pool of
                                  3
                savings or assets.  However this calculus should not be seen in terms of the ‘rational’ intertemporal
                optimisation. The perceived risks and the value of security of assets will be subjective and subject
                to waves of fear and optimism, as households receive new information and are infected by the
                opinions, fears and optimism of others. This inherent instability was central to Keynes idea of the
                fundamental uncertainty having a real and lasting impact on the real economy:
                      Actually, however, we have, as a rule, only the vaguest idea of any but the most direct
                      consequences of our acts. Sometimes we are not much concerned with their remoter
                      consequences, even tho time and chance may make much of them. But sometimes we
                      are intensely concerned with them, more so, occasionally, than with the immediate con-
                      sequences. Now of all human activities which are aﬀected by this remoter preoccupation,
                      it happens that one of the most important is economic in character, namely, Wealth.
                      The whole object of the accumulation of Wealth is to produce results, or potential re-
                      sults, at a comparatively distant, and sometimes at an indeﬁnitely distant, date. Thus
                      the fact that our knowledge of the future is ﬂuctuating, vague and uncertain, renders
                      Wealth a peculiarly unsuitable subject for the methods of the classical economic theory.
                      This theory might work very well in a world in which economic goods were necessarily
                      consumed within a short interval of their being produced. But it requires, I suggest,
                      considerable amendment if it is to be applied to a world in which the accumulation of
                      wealth for an indeﬁnitely postponed future is an important factor; and the greater the
                      proportionate part played by such wealth-accumulation the more essential does such
                      amendment become. Keynes (1937c)
                This approach to consumption and savings should not be interpreted to imply that consumption
                will be highly volatile. Rather it implies that consumption is unlikely to be aﬀected by small (or
                large) changes in the interest rate or ‘rational’ intertemporal optimisation over a long and uncertain
                future.
                4.1.3    Very high income earners
                The third group is very high income earners who have considerably more income than necessary
                to satisfy basic necessities, are able to indulge in luxury consumption and accumulate wealth, and
                indirectly power. For this group (a combination of capitalists, rentiers and a few ‘workers’ with
                                                                                   4
                special talents and very high incomes), once consumption needs have been satiated, the dominant
                motivation becomes the accumulation of wealth in order to exert power and inﬂuence. In this case,
                accumulated wealth, in addition to providing security, provides power over others, and, if unchecked,
                3This is similar to the approach of R¨otheli (2017) who showed that simply examining the trade–oﬀ between assets
                 and consumption was an eﬀective control mechanism to enable survival and under certain assumptions obtain an
                 outcome not very diﬀerent from the impossible constrained optimisation of traditional theory.
                4This is not a reference to needs in the literal sense, but rather socially determined consumption validating the wealth
                 and status of the wealthy as in Veblen (1889) or Duesenberry (1949).
                        CHAPTER4. BEHAVIORALMICRO-FOUNDATIONS FOR MACROECONOMICPOLICY18
                        the ability to alter the rules of the game of the socio-economic system, in favour of those possessing
                        the most wealth (see for example Cohen et al. (2012) and Carroll (2000)). For the purposes of the
                        current analysis, the important point here is that for this group, there is unlikely to be a signiﬁcant
                        correlation between income and consumption (see Dynan, Skinner, and Zeldes (2004)). Changes in
                        volatile income would be largely reﬂected in changes in savings rather than consumption.
                        Empirical work such as Mian, Straub, and Suﬁ (2021) and International Monetary Fund (2022)
                        suggest that in fact the top income percentile of the population in the US saves more than total
                        investment, and that this high level of saving has not boosted levels of investment, but is oﬀset by
                        dissaving of the bottom 50% of the income distribution. The very high levels of saving among the
                        highest income levels considerably undermines any universal rational consumer optimisation model,
                        as opposed to an approach based in social realities.
                        Clearly there is no sharp dividing line between each of the three groups and one would expect
                        households on the border line between the poor and the middle class, or between the rich and the
                        middle class to exhibit behaviour characteristic of a mixture of the two groups. This will not have
                        any signiﬁcant eﬀect on our analysis.
                        What is important, however, is that the savings and investment behaviour (as well as the eﬀective-
                        ness of ﬁscal and monetary policy) of economies will be determined by the relative sizes of each of
                        these groups in the economy, and on the extent to which ﬁscal and monetary policies have diﬀering
                        impacts on each of the groups. For example. increases in taxation on the poor (particularly through
                        indirect taxation) will simply reduce income and consumption (but cannot aﬀect savings, as these
                        will remain at zero). On the middle class taxation is likely to reduce both consumption and saving,
                        while on the rich taxation should aﬀect only saving given the independence of consumption from
                        incomes. Similarly, public expenditure is likely to stimulate demand far more when directed towards
                        the poorest than the most wealthy strata of society.
                        The fundamental argument here is that the canonical optimisation problem for consumers is not
                        the one described in most textbooks and outlined in Section xxxx (Theories of consumption) on
                        page xxx, in which a consumer maximises utility subject to a budget constraint, and from which
                        can be derived the narrative of consumption being inversely related to interest rates as summarised
                        below:
                                                                          T
                                                       max u=Xυ(c)                                                          (intertemporal utility)
                                                                                t    t
                                                                           1                                                                                                  (4.1)
                                                                    T                               T
                                                                  X c                              X y
                                              subject to                       t      =A +                     t                 (budget constraint)
                                                                                   t         1                      t
                                                                    1    (1 +r)                      1   (1 +r)
                        Rather, the problem faced by individuals is how to minimise the probability that in any time period
                        initial assets plus income will be insuﬃcient (or unavailable) to maintain a socially determined min-
                        imum level of consumption. Conceptually, this could be characterised as individuals or households
                        attempting to hold reserves of assets in order to maintain a minimum level of consumption in the
                        event of income shocks (such as unemployment) or expenditure shocks (such as health or social care
                        expenditures), as well as accumulating reserves to cover retirement, and or inability to work due to
                        disability, suﬃcient to cover probable life expectancy. Nevertheless, in the US in 2021, 40 percent
                        of households did not have money set aside for emergencies and would need to borrow, sell assets
                        or draw on other savings to confront a loss of income from employment. 32 percent of households
                        had less than $400 for emergency expenses, while 24 percent had diﬃcultly paying normal monthly
                CHAPTER4. BEHAVIORALMICRO-FOUNDATIONS FOR MACROECONOMICPOLICY19
                bills (Federal Reserve System 2022).
                This suggests that once we move from a framework of rational optimisation by homogeneous house-
                holds (which is recognised to be both psychologically and computationally impossible) to a more
                realistic approach in which consumption and saving levels are socially determined and in which
                the psychological objectives of households (the avoidance of loss and destitution and the pursuit
                of power, for both of which there is empirical evidence) are realistic, the macroeconomic impact
                of ﬁscal and monetary policy cannot be usefully explained though changes in the size of the pub-
                lic sector deﬁcit or surplus, the ratio of debt to GDP, nor through changes in short-term interest
                rates. In each case an analysis of how the policies would impact the consumption and investment
                of each of the three broad groups, described above, would be necessary to evaluate their overall
                macroeconomic impact.
                4.1.3.1    The demand for ﬁnancial assets
                Once we reject the central axiom of orthodox economics that consumer behaviour is governed by
                the desire to maximise utility over time and across generations,5 and replace it with the notion
                of individuals acquiring ﬁnancial assets as a form of insurance for the future without, necessarily,
                saving for speciﬁc purposes of future consumption, it becomes possible to talk about a demand for
                ﬁnancial assets, per se, which have a value for the individual.
                This contrasts signiﬁcantly from the orthodox view, as expressed, for example, in one of the leading
                textbooks of advanced macroeconomics:
                      At a more general level, the basic idea of the permanent-income hypothesis is a simple
                      insight about saving: saving is future consumption. As long as an individual does not
                      save just for the sake of saving, he or she saves to consume in the future. The saving
                      maybeusedforconventional consumption later in life, or bequeathed to the individual’s
                      children for their consumption, or even used to erect monuments to the individual upon
                      his or her death. But as long as the individual does not value saving in itself, the decision
                      about the division of income between consumption and saving is driven by preferences
                      between present and future consumption and information about future consumption
                      prospects. (Romer 2018, 375)
                The view of individuals acquiring ﬁnancial assets for the purposes of security and insurance is not
                incompatible with many aspects of existing consumption theory. In particular, tendencies to smooth
                income, and to save for retirement, with lower savings rates for young populations, would be entirely
                consistent with the notion of a speciﬁc demand for ﬁnancial assets. What would not be compatible
                wouldbethenotionthatchanges to ﬁscal policy would have an impact on the private sector through
                anticipation of higher or lower taxes on future generations as suggested in the Ricardian equivalence
                literature, stemming from Barro (1974).
                Theimpactofﬁscalpolicyon a closed economy could be described as one in which the private sector
                                                      6
                hasanetdemandforﬁnancialassets, whilethepublicsector suppliesﬁnancialassetsthroughpublic
                deﬁcits or contracts their supply through public surpluses. ‘Equilibrium’ in this ‘market’ is then
                obtained through increases and decreases in income.
                If the private sector is demanding, in aggregate, an increase in ﬁnancial assets, by spending less than
                5An impossible task computationally and, more importantly, conceptually, in the face of radical uncertainty.
                6This net demand for ﬁnancial assets could conceivably be negative, although in most growing economies is likely
                 to to be positive. In this context we are only referring to eﬀective demand for ﬁnancial assets, by individuals or
                 institutions, which gradually increase stocks over time, by a process of spending less than income.
                CHAPTER4. BEHAVIORALMICRO-FOUNDATIONS FOR MACROECONOMICPOLICY20
                it receives, at full employment of national resources, the public sector must supply those ﬁnancial
                assets in the form of an equivalent public sector deﬁcit. If the public sector fails to supply the assets
                                                                                            7
                demanded, because it is implementing a (relatively) tight ﬁscal policy,       the result will be that
                income decreases until private sector demand for ﬁnancial assets, contracts to the level of supply of
                public ﬁnancial assets. Similarly, if the public deﬁcit is greater than the demand for private sector
                ﬁnancial assets and full employment of resources, incomes will tend to increase, if necessary through
                inﬂation, until the private demand for ﬁnancial assets rises to meet the public sector deﬁcit.
                In this framework it makes no sense to talk about the private sector anticipating future taxes to
                                       8
                repay current deﬁcits.    The ﬁnancing requirements of the public sector in the future depend on
                the a large number of complex real variables, including the future demographic structure of the
                population, the future volume and structure of investment, the nature of the future social contract
                and provisions for welfare, unemployment and health insurance, and indeed the nature, timing and
                outcomes of future wars. These are to all intents and purposes radically uncertain and unknowable.
                4.2     Consumption determined by hierarchy of needs
                4.3     The insigniﬁcance of interest rates for consumption
                4.4     Beyond proﬁt maximising ﬁrms
                4.4.1    Pricing policy
                4.5     Ataxonomy of inﬂation - a return to ﬁrst principles
                In the previous discussions of the the diﬀerent approaches of macroeconomic policy for economic
                stabilisation there were implicitly various potentially contradictory explanations for inﬂation. The
                monetarist explanation implies that it is a purely monetary phenomenon, whereas cost push ex-
                planations (or supply shocks) might indicate that the roots of inﬂation are in the structure of the
                economy (particularly in the Latin American structural tradition, which places emphasis on the
                                                                                                                   9
                importance of social and economic structures, and the existence of bottlenecks in key sectors ).
                There are also arguments suggesting that inﬂation is largely a ﬁscal phenomenon (although such
                arguments implicitly have a monetary component as well).
                4.6     Atheory of inﬂation
                Orthodox theories of inﬂation begin with the assumption that there is a set of relative prices which
                would constitute an equilibrium for the economy, and that without further changes in preferences,
                technology, knowledge, all agents would be satisﬁed, and there would be no pressures on prices to
                change. In practice, of course, all the exogenous determinants of the system are changing on a
                daily basis, and so there will never be a stationary vector of prices to ‘solve’ the system of general
                7In this case ﬁscal policy is tight only relative to demand for ﬁnancial assets. Thus, if the private sector is ‘demanding’
                 new ﬁnancial assets of 4 per cent of GDP, a deﬁcit of 3 per cent of GDP could be considered tight. It will also be
                 seen later (in section xxx) that the tightness of ﬁscal policy would also need to be measured with reference to the
                 structure of public revenues and expenditure, and not only the volume of the deﬁcit or surplus.
                8The idea of the private sector oﬀsetting the ﬁscal stance (the Ricardian equivalence hypothesis) depends fundamen-
                 tally on the axiom of individuals maximising life time utility from consumption.
                9Need some references here.xxxx
                CHAPTER4. BEHAVIORALMICRO-FOUNDATIONS FOR MACROECONOMICPOLICY21
                equilibrium equations. Nevertheless, it would not be unreasonable to assume that agents in a general
                equilibrium system would be able to judge in which direction prices would need to change in order
                to resolve excesses of supply and demand in speciﬁc markets. This indeed is the central heuristic
                of neoclassical economics and monetary explanations of inﬂation. As was discussed previously, the
                implicit theory of inﬂation is then derived by appealing to the ‘classical dichotomy’ is to explain
                the level of prices (and thus the rate of inﬂation) as being a purely monetary phenomenon.
                There are a number of problems with this framework for the determination of relative prices,
                however. The ﬁrst is that economic agents (people and enterprises) simply accept the gains and
                losses implied by changes in relative prices. While gains will of course be accepted, losses are likely
                to be strongly resisted. The second problem is that it assumes that agents’ behaviour is governed
                by the rational maximisation of utility. Finally, it is assumed that they have the cognitive ability
                to perform such a maximisation. Behavioural economics literature 10 has clearly demonstrated that
                these three axioms of behaviour do not represent the way individuals make choices and cannot
                therefore form a satisfactory basis for macroeconomic theory.
                Ratherthanviewinginﬂationasamonetaryphenomenonitismoreusefultoviewitasaconﬂictover
                the allocation of resources. In this view there will be a number of competing factors which determine
                the levels of inﬂationary pressure in the economy. On the one hand increasing productivity and
                labour force participation will tend to decrease inﬂationary pressures (by making more resources
                available for distribution), while a deterioration (improvement) in the terms of trade will increase
                (decrease) inﬂationary pressures. Similarly, devaluation (revaluation) of the real exchange rate will
                increase (decrease) inﬂationary pressures.
                Equally, excess aggregate demand allows agents in some sectors to increase their command over
                resources, by raising relevant prices (including wages).      However, whether they will do so and
                whether this will result in sustained inﬂation will depend of a set of factors to be discussed below.
                The question then is: if agents are not (and cannot be) mechanically optimising resources, how are
                prices and inﬂation determined. To say that agents are not rational optimisers setting marginal
                productivity and marginal desire for leisure equal to prices and wages, does not mean that price
                setting for many goods and services will not respond to the forces of ‘supply and demand’. Rather
                the argument is that since, in many cases, the marginal calculations are impossible, the setting of
                prices and wages will rely substantially on convention and historically established notions of fairness.
                4.6.1    Investment decisions
                4.6.2    Inﬂuence of interest rates on investment
                10For example, see Simon (1955, 1956), Kahneman and Tversky (1979), Kahneman (2002, 2003a), and Thaler (2016,
                  2018) and many others.
                 Chapter 5
                 Alternative theories of the role of the
                 rate of interest
                 It will be clear from the above arguments that there is little role for the rate of interest to perform
                 an to equilibrate savings and investment in the economy. Indeed, as discussed previously, the idea
                 that an increase in the rate of interest could increase savings and therefore investment and growth
                 is both logically and empirically unfounded.
                 There is a wealth of empirical evidence suggesting that saving is insensitive to changes in interest
                 rates.  Monetary policy (largely through interest rate movements) may have aﬀects on private
                 consumption and investment decisions. However, once one removes the axiom of the maximisation
                 of intertemporal utility as the dominant motivation for consumers, the scope for interest rates to
                 aﬀect private consumption decisions is considerably diminished. This is consistent with the empirical
                 literature [cite sources] on the relatively low elasticity of consumption to interest rates.
                 Whether interest rates will aﬀect private consumption signiﬁcantly will depend very much on the
                 institutional framework for consumption. In an economy in which a large part of the population
                 buys houses on mortgages (particularly variable rate mortgages), there is no doubt that interest
                 rates will aﬀect income and consumption, both through the purchase of new housing (which also
                 drives a signiﬁcant part of the consumer durable market) and through the income and wealth eﬀects
                 on existing borrowers, where a rise in the interest rate will act as a tax on the borrower’s income
                 and (over time) reduce the perceived value of assets (such as property). However, those parts of
                 the population who are credit constrained or holders of ﬁnancial assets will, in the former case, be
                 insensitive to interest rate changes, and in the latter, have a positive income eﬀect for a rise in the
                 interest rate. Thus the social and institutional structure will determine if there is any sensitivity of
                 consumption to interest rate movements.
                 The relationship of physical investment to interest rates is also unlikely to be a smooth monotonic
                 function. In the paradigm of the macroeconomic textbooks entrepreneurs have the choice of invest-
                 ing in numerous projects with a well deﬁned rate of return (possibly with a well deﬁned variance
                 around the expected rate of return). If the expected rate of return exceeds the interest rate (and
                 the entrepreneur can secure the necessary capital - from borrowing, equity or own resources) the
                 investment is likely to take place.
                 Hence, in this approach a fall in the (real) rate of interest will tend to raise the volume of investment,
                 while a rise will diminish the volume of investment. There is little doubt that very high real rates
                                                                      22
                CHAPTER5. ALTERNATIVETHEORIESOFTHEROLEOFTHERATEOFINTEREST23
                of interest are eﬀective in curtailing investment, and indeed severe monetary contractions can very
                quickly reduce investment levels, by raising enormously the risk of investment, in a moment when
                demand for ﬁnal output is likely to fall. While the comparison of the relative returns on ﬁnancial
                assets and physical investment may have some eﬀect, there is little doubt that the principal eﬀect
                of raising interest rates is to reduce the expected return of investment, through expected falls in
                aggregate demand. As discussed previously the likelihood of a very high variance of the rate of
                return on investment (particularly in countries with weak institutional structures), is also likely to
                reduce the elasticity of investment to the rate of interest.
                Lowrates of interest, however, may not have symmetric eﬀects. While they may reduce slightly the
                costs of investment, they will not increase expected returnsby as much as high rates depress expected
                returns. The experience of ultra-low interest rates since 2008 is perhaps the clearest illustration
                of this point. There has not been an extraordinary investment boom by historical standards. Nor
                have zero real or nominal rates suddenly made previously unviable investments viable, precisely
                because of the uncertainty over returns. What low interest rates have done is to raise asset prices,
                                                                                                                    1
                (property, shares, cryptocurrency, etc.), often purchased using cheap credit to leverage returns, as
                wealth holders look for alternative (and often more risky) assets to produce a return. Over time
                the rise in asset prices may also contribute to raising consumption through wealth eﬀects, at the
                expense of increasing the risks of reversing monetary policy, as evidenced by the economic crises of
                2008 and 2022.
                All these considerations suggest that private expenditure on consumption and investment may be
                aﬀected by monetary policy in an uncertain and unpredictable manner. The eﬀects of monetary
                policy will depend upon changing views about the future, of both consumers and investors. They
                are unlikely to be linear or even monotonic. In these circumstances, while it may be possible to
                identify at a speciﬁc moment in time an interest rate which will be consistent with full employment
                of resources at a low inﬂation rate, there will be nothing natural or stable about this interest rate,
                and indeed, in many circumstances it may not exist. There is no reason that a natural interest rate
                should exist (see Clarke (1996)) once we dispense with the idea that interest rates in some sense
                reﬂect a trade-oﬀ between present and future consumption for consumers engaged in an exercise of
                intertemporal utility maximisation, or that it is related to the real (unknowable) return to physical
                capital.
                5.1     Abrief history of theories of the interest rate
                One of the key narratives in economics is that of the natural or neutral rate of interest. This idea
                was ﬁrst formulated by Wicksell in the following statement:
                      “There is a certain rate of interest on loans which is neutral in respect to commodity
                      prices, and tends neither to raise nor to lower them. This is necessarily the same as the
                      rate of interest which would be determined by supply and demand if no use were made
                      of money and all lending were eﬀected in the form of real capital goods. It comes to
                      much the same thing to describe it as the current value of the natural rate of interest
                      on capital.” Wicksell (1936, p. 102)
                Summers makes the explicit connection with Wicksell’s in his discussion of secular stagnation:
                1This is the essence of Minsky’s Financial Instability Hypothesis, Minsky (1977, 1986) which argues that ﬁnancial
                 crises are not aberrations or due to policy errors, but rather inherent characteristics of capitalist economies with
                 ﬁnancial markets.
                CHAPTER5. ALTERNATIVETHEORIESOFTHEROLEOFTHERATEOFINTEREST24
                      “Excess savings tend to drive interest rates down, and excess investment demand tends
                      to drive them up. Following the Swedish economist Knut Wicksell, it is common to refer
                      to the real interest rate that balances saving and investment at full employment as the
                      ‘natural’ or ‘neutral’ real interest rate.” Summers (2016, p. 4)
                In this formulation the ‘natural’ rate of interest is equivalent to the unobservable return to physical
                capital. The idea is that when the observable money rate of interest is equal to this return on capital
                there will be no pressure on prices (either upwards or downwards). The notion is very similar to
                that adopted by monetary policy makers currently. For example, in a speech on the challenges of
                monetary policy Jerome Powell notes that:
                      “the general level of interest rates has fallen both here in the United States and around
                      the world. Estimates of the neutral federal funds rate, which is the rate consistent with
                      the economyoperatingatfullstrengthandwithstableinﬂation, have fallensubstantially,
                      in large part reﬂecting a fall in the equilibrium real interest rate, or ‘r-star’. This rate
                      is not aﬀected by monetary policy but instead is driven by fundamental factors in the
                      economy, including demographics and productivity growth–the same factors that drive
                      potential economic growth.” Powell (2020)
                The idea of the ‘neutral’ rate of interest in monetary policy, is very close to Wicksell’s, and in
                Powell’s formulation the central goal of monetary policy is to set interest rates at this neutral rate,
                which is consistent with full employment and price stability, and determined by macroeconomic
                fundamentals, in the real economy. The quote from Powell’s speech also illustrates how a falling
                                                                                                                2
                neutral rate of interest may be seen as both a symptom and a cause of secular stagnation.
                In Wicksell’s formulation, there was the implicit assumption that of the natural tendency for an
                economy to full employment through endogenous price (including interest rate) adjustments.
                5.1.1    Liquidity preference and loanable funds
                Since the publication of Keynes General Theory there has been considerable debate as to the role
                and determination of the rate of interest. The issue has revolved around whether the interest rate
                is the price of liquidity or whether in some sense it is set in the market for the supply and demand
                for loanable funds (which is often - incorrectly - conﬂated with the supply and demand for savings
                to ﬁnance investment).
                The issue was broadly considered as a distraction following Hicks apparent demonstration that the
                two theories were formally equivalent, in that in a Walrasian general equilibrium system by Walras’
                law one market was necessarily redundant, and so that if one eliminated the market for loans or
                bonds, the rate of interest was the price of money (as in the liquidity preference theory) while if
                one eliminated the money market the rate of interest becomes the price of bonds (as in the loanable
                funds theory). (See Hicks (1936, 1946) and further discussion in Patinkin (1958).)
                It was (reputedly) commented by Abba Lerner that if one could eliminate any market from the
                Walrasian system, what would happen if one eliminated the market for peanuts. Would we have
                a peanut theory of interest? (See Tsiang (1956)). Behind this possibly apocryphal comment there
                is a serious issue. One cannot simply eliminate from the Walrasian system any market, if that
                market is either too small or has close substitutes. Indeed, most generic macroeconomic models
                2See for example Rachel and Summers (2019b, 2019a) and Summers (2014b, 2014a). The declining neutral rate is
                 attributed to factors such as demographics and relatively cheap capital, but also contributes to secular stagnation by
                 reducing the room for monetary policy to correct the stagnation due to the implied lower bound on nominal interest
                 rates.
                CHAPTER5. ALTERNATIVETHEORIESOFTHEROLEOFTHERATEOFINTEREST25
                of Walrasian general equilibrium only have a few markets (such as money, bonds, labour, goods,
                foreign exchange). Although theoretically a full Walrasian general equilibrium may have thousands
                of markets for each possible commodity, type of labour, and ﬁnancial instrument, in practice it
                makes little sense to have equations for each market, particularly when it a close substitute for
                other markets.
                In the case of the market for money, loans and bonds, one could treat these as all relatively close
                substitutes which constitute a generic commodity of ﬁnancial assets, which is desired in and of itself,
                which is required for the provision of security against hazards and destitution. This commodity (net
                ﬁnancial assets) can only be acquired, through the diﬀerence between income and net expenditure
                on goods and services.
                In this case there is no market to eliminate and the rate of interest (or rather the vector of rates
                of interest in the economy) becomes the relative price to distinguish ﬁnancial assets from a pure
                medium of exchange money.
                5.2     Interest as an expression of time preference
                5.3     The rate of interest and the return to capital
                One of the questions which might arise is how is it possible for the rate of interest to diﬀer (persis-
                tently) from the rate of return to capital. The answer is simply that the rate of return to capital
                is not known ex-ante. Thus if the ex-post rate of return to capital were to rise, this might well
                raise the incentive to invest. However, investors have no means of knowing that the rate of return
                to capital for new investments will be equal to the observed ex-post rate of return. Moreover, the
                return on any particular investment will be very uncertain, given that the ex-post return to capital
                is likely to have a very large variance, and include investments which have returns of several orders
                of magnitude greater than the mean, as well as investments which have strongly negative returns.
                In these circumstance there can be no mechanism which will tend to equalise money rates of interest
                to the returns to physical investment.
                It would also be the case that investment would not be very sensitive to changes in interest rates,
                but much more to the availability of credit. A change in the rate of interest, if credit is available,
                would simply make a small diﬀerence to the risk of losses from the investment (which behavioural
                       3
                theory would suggest is one of the main factors in determining whether an investment will be
                carried out or not). On the other hand the availability, or otherwise, of credit at whatever interest
                rate, could determine the feasibility of an investment.
                In this section it is argued that the observed low savings rates in many developing countries are
                more likely to be the result of the low quality of investment - by this it is meant investment which
                includes a signiﬁcant proportion of expenditure on ‘capital’ which is not productive. Pritchett
                (2000) describes this phenomenon in great detail. In particular he notes that:
                      Thevalue of capital and cost of investment will diverge ex post for at least three reasons:
                      relative price shifts, technological changes, and mistakes. Since the value of a capital
                      good depends on expected future prices, not fully anticipated changes in relative prices
                      will change the value of capital goods. These changes in relative prices can stem either
                      from terms of trade changes or from policy reforms (for example, a decline in value
                3See for example the empirical work on loss aversion: Benartzi and Thaler (1995), Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler
                 (1991), Novemsky and Kahneman (2005), Thaler et al. (1997), and Tversky and Kahneman (1991)
                CHAPTER5. ALTERNATIVETHEORIESOFTHEROLEOFTHERATEOFINTEREST26
                      of capital equipment devoted to import substitution following tariﬀ reductions). Tech-
                      nological innovations create a process of ‘creative destruction’ that reduces the value
                      of existing capital stocks that embody old techniques due to innovation. Finally, even
                      though private investors equate costs and expected value, when investing the private
                      sector often makes (large) mistakes. The private sector will have its share of ex post
                      white elephants either through underestimating costs or overestimating potential prof-
                      its. (Pritchett 2000, p. 363)
                The implicit assumption in all analyses of productivity and capital accumulation in economies is
                that capital is accumulated in each sector (s) of an economy is given by the following equation:
                                                      Ks=Ks −δsKs +Is                                              (5.1)
                                                         t     t−1       t−1    t
                Where Ks is the capital stock in time t of sector s and δs is the rate of annual depreciation in sector
                          t
                s, while Is is investment in sector s for time period t. The sectors could represent public and private
                          t
                sectors or diﬀerent economic sectors of the economy. Thus, summing across sectors, the productive
                capital stock of the economy is given by:
                                                                     n
                                                             Kt =XKs                                               (5.2)
                                                                         t
                                                                    s=1
                However, the above presumes that all investment has produced productive capital, or in other
                words the value of the capital created is the cost of the initial investment, and that no investment
                is wasted or unﬁnished. This assumption would appear to be quite unwarranted, but as Pritchett
                notes, never stated or challenged in empirical work on capital, growth and development. Immedi-
                ately one considers the enormous number of investments, both public and private, which are either
                never ﬁnished or are soon abandoned, once their economic unviability becomes apparent, it is clear
                that any deﬁnition of capital based upon Cumulated Depreciated Investment Eﬀort (CUDIE), as
                Pritchett terms it, is likely to be wrong by orders of magnitude for most developing countries. Er-
                roneous estimates of capital from such methods contribute to convoluted debates to explain how
                                                                                                          4
                Total Factor Productivity declines in many countries over signiﬁcant periods of time.
                An alternative formulation is to include in the calculation of the accumulated capital a factor γ to
                represent the diﬀerence between investment eﬀort Is and investment which results in the creation
                                                                       t
                of capital, as follows:
                                                     Ks=Ks −δsKs +γsIs                                             (5.3)
                                                       t      t−1       t−1    t  t
                Inthis formulation, γs could vary between one and zero, with a value of one implying that investment
                                      t
                wasof‘maximum’quality, withall investment leading to the creation of productive capital at market
                prices, and zero implying that investment eﬀort led to no creation of productive capital.
                While traditionally γ has been assumed to be unity, thus allowing the estimation of TFP growth
                from a capital stock calculated as a perpetual inventory, using the Solow growth equation, Pritchett
                makes an assumption of positive TFP growth (1%) to calculate the implied value of γ, which is
                4See for example L´opez C´ordova and M´arquez Padilla (2016) and World Bank (2014) for discussions of these issues
                 in the cases of Mexico and Brazil. In addition Pritchett (2000, p. 375) shows that 55% of developing countries have
                 negative total TFP growth over the thirty year period from 1960 to 1990 using the standard formulation of capital
                 accumulation from Equation (5.1).
                CHAPTER5. ALTERNATIVETHEORIESOFTHEROLEOFTHERATEOFINTEREST27
                the proportion of investment eﬀort actually converted into productive capital. The results of the
                calculations suggest that
                5.4     Equilibration of savings and investment
                One of the most common diagnoses of slow growth and lack of development is a low savings ratio.
                Low savings are said to lead to inadequate ﬁnance for investment and thus constrain development.
                Low savings rates are often attributed to ﬁnancial repression (controlled interest rates) or the
                underdevelopment of ﬁnancial institutions discouraging ﬁnancial intermediation.
                This explanation is supported by the narrative in which the lack of savings raises market interest
                rates, while government intervention to lower interest rates distorts the process of capital allocation
                and ﬁnancial intermediation by the banking and ﬁnancial system. It sounds very plausible and ﬁts
                in with the standard orthodox approach in which almost economists are trained. It is, however, an
                explanation which is not logically consistent, and also which does not have an empirical basis.
                The logical inconsistency can be seen very clearly by means of two thought experiments. In the
                ﬁrst we consider an economy with low saving and investment. An eﬀective measure is taken to
                                  5
                encourage saving. Consumers reduce their expenditure and deposit the non-consumed funds in the
                banking system. The banking system, however, has no additional liquidity, as every peso, rupee
                or real deposited by consumers constitutes a reduction in funds held by producers in the banking
                system.
                The second thought experiment is the following: suppose the authorities take measures to increase
                conﬁdence in the banking system. Suppose further that the result of these measures is to encourage
                the deposit of hoarded funds and or precious metals with the banking system. In this case, the
                banks will have additional liquidity and the ability to lend, without there having been any change
                in savings. In eﬀect if investment is constrained by a lack of lending, this cannot be solved by
                increasing saving. If an increase in lending allows an increase in investment, in a economy employed
                at full capacity, then clearly there will be macroeconomic consequences to the increase in investment,
                in the form of inﬂation and or an increase in the deﬁcit of the current account of the balance of
                payments. Inﬂationwouldreducebothex-ante consumptionandinvestment tolevels consistent with
                capacity, while the increased balance of payments deﬁcit would imply additional external ﬁnancing.
                In both cases investment would be higher than in the previous situation, without an increase in the
                propensity of households and producers to save.
                5.4.1    Whyare investment and savings rates low in some countries?
                If a low propensity to save cannot logically be a cause of low investment and growth, then it is
                important to provide a coherent explanation for the observed cases of low savings and investment.
                It is often presumed that, particularly in developing countries, the distance from the technological
                frontier, and the relative lack of capital, implies that there must be many highly proﬁtable invest-
                ment opportunities with returns that far exceed those in the most developed countries. The fact
                that investment levels are often lower in developing countries and that capital often ﬂows from
                                           6
                poorer to richer countries suggests that it is necessary to examine the factors determining the level
                of investment.
                5It is not clear what the nature of such a measure would be. Policy makers have been notoriously unsuccessful in
                 ﬁnding levers to increase savings.
                6See the debate on the paradox of capital ﬂows which started with Lucas (1990).
       CHAPTER5. ALTERNATIVETHEORIESOFTHEROLEOFTHERATEOFINTEREST28
       The ﬁrst question is whether proﬁtable investment opportunities exist, at least in principle. By
       this we mean that if an investor were to secure the physical capital, do the necessary inputs, in the
       form of labour, raw materials and other inputs, exist to produce saleable output with a positive
       return on the capital. The answer in almost all countries to this question must be positive. Indeed
       it is this positive answer that is the basis of the paradox of capital ﬂows from poor countries to
       rich ones, and also the reason that, for many decades, development was simply seen as a question
       of making the necessary capital available to developing countries, in order to realise the returns
       technically available. This was the consequence of the narrative which suggested that if investment
       opportunities exist, these will be seen by entrepreneurs and investment will be forthcoming if the
       ﬁnance is available. The absence of such investment in many cases was ascribed to the lack of
       ﬁnance (or the lack of savings).
       This narrative, however, ignored four far more important questions.
        (a) The ﬁrst of these is often a basic lack of knowledge (or managerial know-how) among potential
          entrepreneurs about which are viable investments. The result is that many investments fail,
          andthat the return on capital is not a tight distribution around a well deﬁned mean but rather
          a distribution with a very large variance in which the most successful investments may have
          returns in triple digits, while a substantial majority have very low and in many cases negative
          returns. This problem can be mitigated (but certainly not eliminated) through eﬀective bank-
          ing institutions, with good governance, where the key role is not so much the transformation
          of short term deposits into long term lending but rather, the scrutiny of investment proposals
          (see the discussion below).
        (b) A second fundamental issue is the ‘governance environment’ of investment. Do there exist the
          institutions which protect investments and their returns from predatory behaviour by private
          competitors, politicians and state institutions? This is more than a question of pro-forma
          respect for property rights, but concerns the issue of whether economically and politically
          powerful actors are constrained by the rule of law. If they are not, the volume of desired
          investment is likely to be restricted or directed into rent extraction rather than wealth creation.
        (c) Thirdly, there are the traditional constraints to investment - the existence of quality infras-
          tructure (particularly transport and energy) and a well qualiﬁed labour force. These will play
          an important role in determining which investments may be technically and economically
          viable.
        (d) Finally there is the issue of the eﬀectiveness of the banking and ﬁnancial system. It is clearly
          possible that viable investments requiring credit may be turned down by banks or other
          ﬁnancial institutions, or indeed by the individual holders of ﬁnancial assets. This may be
          because of information asymmetry between the investor and the lender, or risk aversion of
          the lender, an inability of the lender to identify the diﬀerence between viable and non-viable
          projects, or possibly political or sectoral criteria used by the lender to identify potential
          investments. Any of these factors would reduce the volume of investment in viable activities,
          and potentially increase the volume of investment in non-viable activities.
       The level and quality of viable investment will thus be determined by these four factors, which are
       likely to dominate the prospects of returns.
                CHAPTER5. ALTERNATIVETHEORIESOFTHEROLEOFTHERATEOFINTEREST29
                5.4.2    The quality of investment
                In this section it is argued that the observed low savings rates in many developing countries are
                more likely to be the result of the low quality of investment - by this it is meant investment which
                includes a signiﬁcant proportion of expenditure on ‘capital’ which is not productive. Pritchett
                (2000) describes this phenomenon in great detail for the public sector. In particular he notes that:
                      Thevalue of capital and cost of investment will diverge ex post for at least three reasons:
                      relative price shifts, technological changes, and mistakes. Since the value of a capital
                      good depends on expected future prices, not fully anticipated changes in relative prices
                      will change the value of capital goods. These changes in relative prices can stem either
                      from terms of trade changes or from policy reforms (for example, a decline in value
                      of capital equipment devoted to import substitution following tariﬀ reductions). Tech-
                      nological innovations create a process of ‘creative destruction’ that reduces the value
                      of existing capital stocks that embody old techniques due to innovation. Finally, even
                      thoughprivate investors equate costs and expected value, when investing the private sec-
                      tor often makes (large) mistakes. The private sector will have its share of ex post white
                      elephants either through underestimating costs or overestimating potential proﬁts. (p.
                      363)
                The implicit assumption in all analyses of productivity and capital accumulation in economies is
                that capital is accumulated in each sector (s) of an economy is given by the following equation:
                                                      Ks=Ks −δsKs +Is
                                                         t     t−1       t−1    t
                Where Ks is the capital stock in time t of sector s and δs is the rate of annual depreciation in sector
                          t
                s, while Is is investment in sector s for time period t. The sectors could represent public and private
                          t
                sectors or diﬀerent economic sectors of the economy. Thus, summing across sectors, the productive
                capital stock of the economy is given by:
                                                                     n
                                                             Kt =XKs
                                                                         t
                                                                    s=1
                However, the above presumes that all investment has produced productive capital, or in other
                words the value of the capital created is the cost of the initial investment, and that no investment
                is wasted or unﬁnished. This assumption would appear to be quite unwarranted, but as Pritchett
                notes, never stated or challenged in empirical work on capital, growth and development. Immedi-
                ately one considers the enormous number of investments, both public and private, which are either
                never ﬁnished or are soon abandoned, once their economic unviability becomes apparent, it is clear
                that any deﬁnition of capital based upon Cumulated Depreciated Investment Eﬀort (CUDIE), as
                Pritchett terms it, is likely to be wrong by orders of magnitude for most developing countries. Er-
                roneous estimates of capital from such methods contribute to convoluted debates to explain how
                                                                                                          7
                Total Factor Productivity declines in many countries over signiﬁcant periods of time.
                An alternative formulation is to include in the calculation of the accumulated capital a factor γ to
                7See for example L´opez C´ordova and M´arquez Padilla (2016) and World Bank (2014) for discussions of these issues
                 in the cases of Mexico and Brazil. In addition Pritchett (2000, p. 375) shows that 55% of developing countries have
                 negative total TFP growth over the thirty year period from 1960 to 1990 using the standard formulation of capital
                 accumulation from Equation (5.1).
                        CHAPTER5. ALTERNATIVETHEORIESOFTHEROLEOFTHERATEOFINTEREST30
                        represent the diﬀerence between investment eﬀort Is and investment which results in the creation
                                                                                                           t
                        of capital, as follows:
                                                                                 Ks=Ks −δsKs +γsIs
                                                                                    t        t−1             t−1        t   t
                        Inthis formulation, γs could vary between one and zero, with a value of one implying that investment
                                                         t
                        wasof‘maximum’quality, withall investment leading to the creation of productive capital at market
                        prices, and zero implying that investment eﬀort led to no creation of productive capital.
                        While traditionally γ has been assumed to be unity, thus allowing the estimation of TFP growth
                        fromacapital stock calculated as a perpetual inventory, using the Solow growth equation , Pritchett
                        makes an assumption of positive TFP growth (1%) to calculate the implied value of γ, which is
                        the proportion of investment eﬀort actually converted into productive capital. The results of the
                        calculations suggest that in many countries the ‘eﬀective’ capital stock is far below the traditionally
                        measure one, and that much ‘investment’ which takes place does not have any value or generate
                        any additional output or income.
                        5.4.3         The determination of the rate of growth
                        In previous sections it was shown how the savings rate could depend directly on the growth rate of
                        the economy. It was also shown that traditional measures of investment and capital accumulation
                        often fail to capture the volume of eﬀectively wasted investment, which appears in the data as
                        negative or very low growth of total factor productivity. This suggests that one of the principal
                        factors determining growth rates is the quality of the public and private institutions underpinning
                        the choice of investment.
                        If, in a relatively undeveloped country, public and private institutions emerge to ensure that i) public
                        investment in infrastructure is eﬀective and relevant to growth and ii) there is ﬁlter to ensure that
                        private sector investment is broadly directed to productive goals and that ineﬀective investment is
                        quickly eliminated, it possible to envisage a cycle in which investment quickly generates growth.
                        The growth generates the necessary saving and thus ﬁnance is not the constraint of investment and
                        growth. An examination of the countries which have managed to take-oﬀ in recent decades will
                        show that these are the two critical factors.
                        5.5          Determination of the long term interest rate
                        5.6          Does there exist an equilibrium rate of interest?
                        All the above arguments depend on the idea that there exists a real rate of interest (positive or
                        negative) that will be consistent with full employment of resources in the economy. This notion in
                        turn implicitly relies upon the main aggregates of spending (investment and consumption) being
                        monotonic and stable functions of the real rate of interest in which ∂I < 0 and ∂C < 0. It is
                                                                                                                                          ∂r                   ∂r
                        also implicit that the range of this ‘equilibrium’ real interest rate should be not very far from a
                        low positive value. If it were to move outside accepted commonly accepted ranges, it is likely
                        that the income and wealth eﬀects of an ‘equilibrium’ rate of say -10% or +10% would destabilise
                        any potential full employment equilibrium. Simply stating these conditions makes clear that the
                        existence of a reasonable equilibrium real rate at all times is doubtful.
                CHAPTER5. ALTERNATIVETHEORIESOFTHEROLEOFTHERATEOFINTEREST31
                Palley (2019), for example, notes that in pure theory changes in interest rates produce both substi-
                tution and income eﬀects and that consequently the direction of eﬀects of changes in real interest
                rates on consumption are uncertain, and will certainly depend on the distribution of debts and cred-
                its throughout the economy. He also highlights the importance of the existence of Non-Reproducible
                                8
                Assets (NRAs) as substitutes for investment, which will impede the workings of the interest rate as
                a mechanism to equilibrate savings and investment. A further potential problem noted by Palley is
                that well known behavioural mechanisms such as the endowment eﬀect (Kahneman, Knetsch, and
                Thaler 1990), whereby negative (real or nominal) interest rates may encourage saving to replace
                lost ﬁnancial assets. Econometrically one of the most robust determinants of private saving is the
                rate of inﬂation. In their analysis of 165 countries over the period 1981–2012 Grigoli, Herman, and
                Schmidt-Hebbel (2014) ﬁnd the following result:
                      Increased macroeconomic uncertainty, proxied by higher inﬂation, leads to increased
                      private precautionary saving. An increase of inﬂation by one pp is associated with a
                      0.39 pp rise in the private saving rate. According to this result, the moderation of
                      inﬂation rates observed around the world since the 1990s contributed to a decline in
                      private saving. (pp.24-25)
                This would again seem to suggest a negative relationship between saving and real interest rates
                (at least in some circumstances), indicating a non-monotonic function in which, over some ranges
                 ∂C >0.
                 ∂r
                Final point is that there is already a mechanism for investment and saving to equilibrate - that is
                changes in income
                5.7      The weight of false narratives
                This paper examines the theoretical and empirical approaches to the role of savings and investment
                in macroeconomic development, and suggests that the analysis of the relationships between savings,
                investment and interest rate has been distorted by what Shiller (2019, 2021) would term as “nar-
                ratives”. These are powerful stories which subtly inﬂuence theoretical and empirical approaches to
                the relationship between these key macroeconomic variables. The key stories are i) that interest
                is the reward for waiting, or for deferring consumption; ii) savings are required for investment and
                therefore at a macroeconomic level a lack of savings can be constraint to growth and development;
                iii) the long-run real interest rate is determined by the balance between desired ex-ante saving and
                desired (ex-ante) investment. It will be argued that
                5.8      AKeynesian-Behavioural theory of the rate of interest for the
                            st
                         21 century
                5.8.1     Separating interest rates from time-preference
                5.8.2     The weak link between interest rates and the accumulation of capital
                5.8.3     Interest rates and demand management
                8Palley gives examples of NRAs such as ﬁat money, precious metals and minerals, land, rent streams from ﬁrms with
                 market power, and intellectual property such as patents and copyrights. To this list could be added crypto currencies
                 and tokens. All have in common that, particularly in an era of low inﬂation and low (possibly negative) nominal
                 interest rates, they can generate a return and substitute productive investment, due to their non–reproducibility.
                  Chapter 6
                  Abehavioural approach to ﬁscal
                  policy
                  The natural or neutral rate of interest conceptually is the solution to the system of Walrasian gen-
                  eral equilibrium equations which would hypothetically maintain the economy at a full employment
                  equilibrium, if nothing else ever changes. The equilibrium is never (and can never be) achieved, as
                  it depends upon the existence of smooth convex preferences, and rational maximisation of utility
                  by omniscient economic agents. In addition, and most importantly for this discussion, the ‘general
                  equilibrium’ will depend upon the ﬁscal stance.
                  This point can be illustrated in a very schematic way as follows.                    Consider the case in which
                  the Government has no budget deﬁcit and ﬁnances all spending from taxation. An interest rate
                  r∗, consistent with full employment and low inﬂation has been found. If the government then
                  reduces (increases) expenditure without changing the rate of taxation a budget surplus (deﬁcit) will
                  emerge and aggregate demand will fall below (rise above) the full employment equilibrium. In the
                  new situation the interest rate r∗ would no longer be the neutral interest rate and policy makers
                  would have to search for a lower (higher) natural interest rate to achieve full employment with low
                             1
                  inﬂation.
                  Another way of examining the issue is to recall the discussion of the demand for ﬁnancial assets in
                  section xxxx. A situation of insuﬃcient demand with downward pressure on prices would normally
                                                                                                                  2
                  induce the monetary authorities to lower interest rates until demand is raised.                    This is, however,
                  equivalent to saying that at full employment there is a net demand for ﬁnancial assets by the private
                                                                       3
                  sector, which requires a public sector deﬁcit to supply them.
                  In the Walrasian (or Arrow-Debreu) general equilibrium approach (Arrow and Debreu 1954), there
                  cannot be a ‘demand’ for ﬁnancial assets as such, as we saw in the quote from Romer in section
                  xxx orthodox macroeconomic theory excludes the possibility of saving being valued by individuals
                  in itself.   In the approach proposed in this paper, individuals do value saving /ﬁnancial assets,
                  1This assumes that in the new situation such an interest rate exists, once the non–linearities of the interest rate
                   function on consumption, investment and asset prices are taken into account.
                  2The experience of the past two decades indicates that the combination of the potential zero lower bound on nominal
                   interest rates, with non–linearities in the interest rate expenditure functions, it may be diﬃcult to ﬁnd a rate of
                   interest consistent with full employment.
                  3The alternative is that a balance of payments surplus is generated by investment in export industries to allow the
                   accumulation of external ﬁnancial assets. This process, however, is unlikely to take place quickly and smoothly.
                                                                             32
               CHAPTER6. ABEHAVIOURALAPPROACHTOFISCALPOLICY                                               33
               in themselves, as security against an uncertain future. Simply changing the interest rate will not
               signiﬁcantly alter this demand. Financial assets (which are not needed in a general equilibrium
               model) can only be acquired as the diﬀerence between income and expenditure.
               6.0.0.1  Alternative Policy Frameworks
               The previous arguments suggest an alternative institutional and policy framework might be possi-
               ble. It is clear that raising interest rates suﬃciently can choke oﬀ investment (not mainly through
               a rationally calculated rate of return calculation), but rather by increasing the risks of adverse out-
               turns, particularly if others reduce investment levels. However, there is little theoretical or empirical
               support for the idea that reducing short term interest rates below the inﬂation target and possibly
               to zero or negative levels in nominal terms will have a substantial eﬀect in stimulating physical
               investment (speculative ﬁnancial investment is another matter). Certainly lowering rates will have
               little impact on consumption through the mechanism of rationally chosen time preference for con-
               sumption. It is arguable that even raising interest rates will only have an eﬀect on consumption
               indirectly, by acting as a signal of greater uncertainty and risks, generating narratives of fear of
               unemployment and coming austerity requiring increased holdings of ﬁnancial assets. In other words
               increasing interest rates may only raise savings by increasing fear and uncertainty.
               Thus if at low rates of interest there is insuﬃcient demand and a tendency towards deﬂation in the
               economy, lowering interest rates will not have a symmetric eﬀect with raising interest rates to reduce
               excess demand. In eﬀect, it might be said that low demand at low interest rates is symptomatic
               of a desire by the private sector to accumulate ﬁnancial assets, which can only be supplied by an
               increase in the public sector deﬁcit.
               Traditionally, it has been suggested that responding to such a situation through ﬁscal policy will
               suﬀer from the following problems:
                (a) Increased expenditure or reduced taxes require time to be put into eﬀect
                (b) The quality of spending will be low without adequate evaluation
                (c) Increased spending or lower taxes are diﬃcult to reverse
               (see reasons in Fiscal Policy and EMU)
               In order to overcome these obstacles it would be necessary to have in place a symmetric institutional
               structure to be able to quickly increase and reduce transfers to the population. This could be
               established through a universal unconditional income transfer, whereby base income will always be
               transferred and temporary additional income transfers made at times of insuﬃcient demand, while
               short-term interest rates have a ﬂoor equal to the inﬂation target. The result of such a system would
               be to use restrictive monetary policy to combat excess demand and expansionary ﬁscal policy to
               deal with insuﬃcient demand.
       Chapter 7
       Abehavioural approach to monetary
       policy
       Monetary Policy Monetary policy (largely through interest rate movements) may have aﬀects
       on private consumption and investment decisions. However, once one removes the axiom of the
       maximisation of intertemporal utility as the dominant motivation for consumers, the scope for
       interest rates to aﬀect private consumption decisions is considerably diminished. This is consistent
       with the empirical literature [cite sources] on the relatively low elasticity of consumption to interest
       rates.
       Whether interest rates will aﬀect private consumption signiﬁcantly will depend very much on the
       institutional framework for consumption. In an economy in which a large part of the population
       buys houses on mortgages (particularly variable rate mortgages), there is no doubt that interest
       rates will aﬀect income and consumption, both through the purchase of new housing (which also
       drives a signiﬁcant part of the consumer durable market) and through the income and wealth eﬀects
       on existing borrowers, where a rise in the interest rate will act as a tax on the borrower’s income
       and (over time) reduce the perceived value of assets (such as property). However, those parts of
       the population who are credit constrained (particularly the ‘poor’, as described above) or holders
       of ﬁnancial assets (largely the ‘rich’ from above) will, in the former case, be insensitive to interest
       rate changes, and in the latter, have a positive income eﬀect for a rise in the interest rate. Thus
       the social and institutional structure will determine if there is any sensitivity of consumption to
       interest rate movements.
       The relationship of physical investment to interest rates is also unlikely to be a smooth monotonic
       function. In the paradigm of the macroeconomic textbooks entrepreneurs have the choice of invest-
       ing in numerous projects with a well deﬁned rate of return (possibly with a well deﬁned variance
       around the expected rate of return). If the expected rate of return exceeds the interest rate (and
       the entrepreneur can secure the necessary capital - from borrowing, equity or own resources) the
       investment is likely to take place.
       Hence, in this approach a fall in the (real) rate of interest will tend to raise the volume of investment,
       while a rise will diminish the volume of investment. There is little doubt that very high real rates
       of interest are eﬀective in curtailing investment, and indeed severe monetary contractions can very
       quickly reduce investment levels, by raising enormously the risk of investment, in a moment when
       demand for ﬁnal output is likely to fall. While the comparison of the relative returns on ﬁnancial
       assets and physical investment may have some eﬀect, there is little doubt that the principal eﬀect
                            34
                CHAPTER7. ABEHAVIOURALAPPROACHTOMONETARYPOLICY                                                       35
                of raising interest rates is to reduce the expected return of investment, through expected falls in
                aggregate demand. As discussed in section xxxx the likelihood of a very high variance of the rate
                of return on investment (particularly in countries with weak institutional structures), is also likely
                to reduce the elasticity of investment to the rate of interest.
                Lowrates of interest, however, may not have symmetric eﬀects. While they may reduce slightly the
                costs of investment, they will not increase expected returnsby as much as high rates depress expected
                returns. The experience of ultra-low interest rates since 2008 is perhaps the clearest illustration
                of this point. There has not been an extraordinary investment boom by historical standards. Nor
                have zero real or nominal rates suddenly made previously unviable investments viable, precisely
                because of the uncertainty over returns. What low interest rates have done is to raise asset prices,
                                                                                                                    1
                (property, shares, cryptocurrency, etc.), often purchased using cheap credit to leverage returns, as
                wealth holders look for alternative (and often more risky) assets to produce a return, as discussed in
                section xxxx. Over time the rise in asset prices may also contribute to raising consumption through
                wealth eﬀects, at the expense of increasing the risks of reversing monetary policy, as evidenced by
                the economic crises of 2008 and 2022.
                All these considerations suggest that private expenditure on consumption and investment may be
                aﬀected by monetary policy in an uncertain and unpredictable manner. The eﬀects of monetary
                policy will depend upon changing views about the future, of both consumers and investors. They
                are unlikely to be linear or even monotonic. In these circumstances, while it may be possible to
                identify at a speciﬁc moment in time an interest rate which will be consistent with full employment
                of resources at a low inﬂation rate, there will be nothing natural or stable about this interest rate,
                and indeed, in many circumstances it may not exist. There is no reason that a natural interest
                rate should exist once we dispense with the idea that interest rates in some sense reﬂect a trade-oﬀ
                between present and future consumption for consumers engaged in an exercise of intertemporal
                utility maximisation, or that it is related to the real (unknowable) return to physical capital.
                1This is the essence of Minsky’s ﬁnancial Instability Hypothesis, Minsky (1977, 1986) which argues that ﬁnancial
                 crises are not aberrations or due to policy errors, but rather inherent characteristics of capitalist economies with
                 ﬁnancial markets.
       Bibliography
       Akerlof, George A. 2002. “Behavioral Macroeconomics and Macroeconomic Behavior.” The Amer-
         ican Economic Review 92 (3): 411–433.
       Arrow, Kenneth J., and Gerard Debreu. 1954. “Existence of an Equilibrium for a Competitive
         Economy.” Econometrica 22 (3): 265–290. JSTOR: 1907353.
       Balls, Edward, and Gus O’Donnell, eds. 2002. Reforming Britain’s Economic and Financial Policy:
         Towards Greater Economic Stability. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
       Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Duﬂo. 2011. Poor Economics : A Radical Rethinking of the Way
         to Fight Global Poverty. New York: Public Aﬀairs.
       Barro, Robert J. 1974. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy 82 (6):
         1095–1117. JSTOR: 1830663.
       Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler. 1995. “Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity Premium
         Puzzle.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (1): 73–92.
       Bernanke, Ben S. 2022. 21st Century Monetary Policy: The Federal Reserve from the Great Inﬂation
         to COVID-19. W. W. Norton & Company.
       Carroll, Christopher. 1997. “Buﬀer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothe-
         sis.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1): 1–55.
          . 2000. “Why Do the Rich Save So Much?” In Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences
         of Taxing the Rich, edited by Joel B. Slemrod, 465–84. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
         Press.
       Carroll, Christopher, Martin B. Holm, and Miles S. Kimball. 2021. “Liquidity Constraints and
         Precautionary Saving.” Journal of Economic Theory 195 (July): 105276.
       Carroll, Christopher, andLawrence Summers.1991. “ConsumptionGrowthParallels IncomeGrowth:
         Some New Evidence.” In National Saving and Economic Performance, edited by B. Douglas
         Bernheim and John B. Shoven, 305–348. Cambridge, MA: University of Chicago Press.
       Clarke, Roland. 1996. “Equilibrium Interest Rates and Financial Liberalisation in Developing Coun-
         tries.” Journal of Development Studies (U.K.) 32:391–413.
       Cohen, Tyler, Francis Fukuyama, Sebastian Mallaby, Robert Reich, James Kurth, Walter Russell
         Meade,andAdamGarﬁnkle.2012.Plutocracy &Democracy: How MoneyCorrupts OurPolitics
         and Culture. The American Interest.
                            36
       BIBLIOGRAPHY                               37
       Cyert, R. M., and J. G. March. 1963. A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ:
         Prentice Hall.
       Deaton, Angus. 1989. Saving and Liquidity Constraints. Technical report w3196. National Bureau
         of Economic Research.
          . 1990. “Saving in Developing Countries: Theory and Review.” In Proceedings of the World
         Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics 1989, edited by Stanley Fischer and
         Dennis De Tray.
          . 1992. Understanding Consumption. Clarendon Lectures in Economics. Oxford: Clarendon
         Press.
          . 2005. “Franco Modigliani and the Life Cycle Theory of Consumption.” BNL Quarterly
         Review 58 (233-234): 91–107.
       Duesenberry, James S. 1949. Income, Saving and the Theory of Consumer Behavior. Cambridge,
         Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
       Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2004. “Do the Rich Save More?”
         Journal of Political Economy 112 (2): 397–444.
       Earl, Peter E. 2022. Principles of Behavioral Economics: Bringing Together Old, New and Evolu-
         tionary Approaches. Cambridge University Press, July.
       Federal Reserve System. 2022. Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2021. Board of Gover-
         nors of the Federal Reserve System.
       Friedman, Milton. 1956. “The Quantity Theory of Money: A Restatement.” In Studies in the Quan-
         tity Theory of Money, edited by Milton Friedman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
          . 1957. Theory Of The Consumption Function. Princeton University Press.
          . 1968. “The Role of Monetary Policy.” The American Economic Review 58 (1): 1–17.
          . 1969. The Optimum Quantity of Money. London: MacMillan.
          . 2006. The Optimum Quantity of Money. New Brunswick, N.J: Aldine Transaction.
       Gal´ı, Jordi. 2015. Monetary Policy, Inﬂation, and the Business Cycle. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
         University Press.
       Grigoli, Francesco, Alexander Herman, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 2014. World Saving. IMF Work-
         ing Paper 14/204. Accessed August 5, 2016.
       Hall, R. L., and C. J. Hitch. 1939. “Price Theory and Business Behaviour.” Oxford Economic Papers
         2 (1): 12–45.
       Hansen, Alvin H. 1939. “Economic Progress and Declining Population Growth.” The American
         Economic Review, 1–15.
       Hicks, John R. 1936. “Mr. Keynes’ Theory of Employment.” The Economic Journal 46 (182): 238–
         253.
          . 1946. Value and Capital: An Inquiry into Some Fundamental Principles of Economic The-
         ory. 2nd Edition. Clarendon Paperbacks. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
       BIBLIOGRAPHY                               38
       International Monetary Fund. 2022. World Economic Outlook: War Sets Back the Global Recovery.
         Washington D.C.: International Monetary Fund, April.
       Kahneman, Daniel. 2002. “Maps of Bounded Rationality: A Perspective on Intuitive Judgment and
         Choice.” Nobel prize lecture, 449–489.
          . 2003a. “A Psychological Perspective on Economics.” The American Economic Review 93
         (2): 162–168.
          . 2003b. “Maps of Bounded Rationality: Psychology for Behavioral Economics.” The Amer-
         ican Economic Review 93 (5): 1449–1475.
          . 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. 1st ed. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
       Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard H. Thaler. 1990. “Experimental Tests of the
         Endowment Eﬀect and the Coase Theorem.” Journal of Political Economy 98 (6): 1325–1348.
          . 1991. “Anomalies: The Endowment Eﬀect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias.” The
         Journal of Economic Perspectives 5 (1): 193–206.
       Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
         Risk.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 263–291.
       Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London:
         Macmillan.
          . 1937a. “Alternative Theories of the Rate of Interest.” Economic Journal 47 (186): 241–252.
          . 1937b. “The ‘Ex-Ante’ Theory of the Rate of Interest.” The Economic Journal 47 (188):
         663–669.
          . 1937c. “The General Theory of Employment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 51:209–
         223.
          . 1940. How to Pay for the War. MacMillan.
       Lankester, Tim. 2024. Inside Thatcher’s Monetarism Experiment: The Promise, the Failure, the
         Legacy. Policy Press.
       L´opez C´ordova, Jos´e Ernesto, and Juan Rebolledo M´arquez Padilla. 2016. “Productivity in Mexico:
         Trends, Drivers, and Institutional Framework.” International Productivity Monitor, no. 30, 28–
         42.
       Lucas, Robert E. 1990. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” The American
         Economic Review 80 (2): 92–96.
       Mian, Atif, Ludwig Straub, and Amir Suﬁ. 2021. “The Saving Glut of the Rich.” Harvard Univeristy
         Working Paper, 68.
       Minsky, Hyman P. 1977. “The Financial Instability Hypothesis: An Interpretation of Keynes and
         an Alternative to ‘Standard’ Theory.” Challenge 20 (1): 20–27.
          . 1986. Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. New Haven: Yale University Press.
       Modigliani, Franco. 1966. “The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving, the Demand for Wealth and the
         Supply of Capital.” Social Research 33 (2): 160–217.
                     BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                                                                        39
                     Modigliani, Franco. 1986. “Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of Nations.” The American
                           Economic Review 76 (3): 297–313.
                     Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Brumberg. 1954. “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function:
                           AnInterpretation of Cross-Section Data.” In Post-Keynesian Economics, edited by Kenneth K.
                           Kurihara, 388–436. New Brunswick, N.J: Rutgers University Press.
                     Novemsky, Nathan, and Daniel Kahneman. 2005. “The Boundaries of Loss Aversion.” Journal of
                           Marketing Research 42 (2): 119–128.
                     Palley, Thomas I. 2019. “The Fallacy of the Natural Rate of Interest and Zero Lower Bound Eco-
                           nomics: Why Negative Interest Rates May Not Remedy Keynesian Unemployment.” Review of
                           Keynesian Economics 7 (2): 151–170.
                     Patinkin, Don. 1958. “Liquidity Preference and Loanable Funds: Stock and Flow Analysis.” Eco-
                           nomica 25 (100): 300–318.
                     Phillips, A. W. 1958. “The Relation between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money
                           Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957.” Economica 25 (100): 283–299.
                     Powell, Jerome H. 2020. “New Economic Challenges and the Fed’s Monetary Policy Review.” Jack-
                           son Hole, Wyoming, August.
                     Pritchett, Lant. 2000. “The Tyranny of Concepts: CUDIE (Cumulated, Depreciated, Investment
                           Eﬀort) Is Not Capital.” Journal of Economic Growth 5 (4): 361–384.
                     Rachel, Luk     asz, and Lawrence Summers. 2019a. “On Falling Neutral Real Rates, Fiscal Policy, and
                           the Risk of Secular Stagnation.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
                              . 2019b. “On Secular Stagnation in the Industrialized World.” Brookings Papers on Economic
                           Activity Spring 2019.
                     Richardson, G. B. 1953. “Imperfect Knowledge and Economic Eﬃciency.” Oxford Economic Papers,
                           136–156.
                              . 1959. “Equilibrium, Expectations and Information.” Economic Journal 69:223–237.
                              . 1960. Information and Investment. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                     Romer, David. 2018. Advanced Macroeconomics (Fifth Edition). McGraw-Hill Education.
                     R¨otheli, Tobias F. 2017. “To Consume or to Save: Are We Maximizing or What?” In Handbook
                           of Behavioural Economics and Smart Decision-Making, edited by Morris Altman, 392–410.
                           Edward Elgar Publishing.
                     Sent, Esther-Mirjam. 2004. “Behavioral Economics: How Psychology Made Its (Limited) Way Back
                           Into Economics.” History of Political Economy 36 (4): 735–760.
                     Shiller, Robert J. 2019. Narrative Economics: How Stories Go Viral and Drive Major Economic
                           Events. Princeton University Press.
                              . 2021. “The Godley–Tobin Memorial Lecture: Animal Spirits and Viral Popular Narratives.”
                           Review of Keynesian Economics 9 (1): 1–10.
                     Simon, Herbert A. 1955. “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice.” The Quarterly Journal of
                           Economics 69:99–118.
       BIBLIOGRAPHY                               40
       Simon, Herbert A. 1956. “Rational Choice and the Structure of the Environment.” Psychological
         Review 63 (2): 129–138.
          . 1979. “Rational Decision Making in Business Organizations.” The American Economic
         Review 69 (4): 493–513. JSTOR: 1808698.
          . 1991. “Bounded Rationality and Organizational Learning.” Organization Science 2 (1):
         125–134.
          . 1996. The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial. MIT Press, March.
       Summers, Lawrence. 2014a. “Reﬂections on the ‘New Secular Stagnation Hypothesis’.” In Secular
         Stagnation Facts, Causes and Cures, edited by Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin. London:
         CEPR.
          . 2014b. “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower
         Bound.” Business Economics 49 (2): 65–73.
          . 2015. “Have We Entered an Age of Secular Stagnation? IMF Fourteenth Annual Research
         Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer, Washington, DC.” IMF Economic Review 63 (1): 277–
         280. JSTOR: 24738081.
          . 2016. “The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do About It.” Foreign
         Aﬀairs 95 (2): 2–9. JSTOR: 43948172.
       Thaler, Richard H. 1994. “Psychology and Savings Policies.” The American Economic Review 84
         (2): 186–192.
          . 2016. “Behavioral Economics: Past, Present, and Future.” The American Economic Review
         106 (7): 1577–1600.
          . 2018. “From Cashews to Nudges: The Evolution of Behavioral Economics.” The American
         Economic Review 108 (6): 1265–1287.
       Thaler, Richard H., Amos Tversky, Daniel Kahneman, and Alan Schwartz. 1997. “The Eﬀect of
         Myopia and Loss Aversion on Risk Taking: An Experimental Test.” The Quarterly Journal of
         Economics 112 (2): 647–661.
       Tsiang, S. C. 1956. “Liquidity Preference and Loanable Funds Theories, Multiplier and Velocity
         Analysis: A Synthesis.” The American Economic Review 46 (4): 539–564. JSTOR: 1814282.
       Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman.1974. “JudgmentunderUncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.”
         Science 185 (4157): 1124–1131.
          . 1991. “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A Reference-Dependent Model.” The Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 106 (4): 1039–1061.
       Veblen, Thorsten. 1889. The Theory of the Leisure Class. New American Library.
       Walsh, Carl E. 2017. Monetary Theory and Policy, Fourth Edition. MIT Press.
       Wicksell, Knut. 1936. Interest and Prices: A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of Money.
         Macmillan (Originally published in 1898 in German as Geldzins Und Guterpreise).¨
       Winter, Joachim K., Kathrin Schlafmann, and Ralf Rodepeter. 2012. “Rules of Thumb in Life-Cycle
         Saving Decisions.” The Economic Journal 122 (560): 479–501.
       BIBLIOGRAPHY                               41
       World Bank. 2014. Brazil’s Productivity Challenge: Selected Issues in Understanding and Improving
         Productivity. World Bank.
