                Chapter 1
                Introduction
                1.1     Main objectives
                This book re-examines the basis of current macro-economic policy making and attempts to establish
                                                                                                   1
                new micro-foundations bringing together some elements of the work of Keynes and a behavioural
                approach to economic theory and policy. When we discuss the work of Keynes we are not refer-
                ring simply to the idea of ﬁscal policy for demand management, as Keynesian theory came to be
                characterised in the post-war period. Rather we focus on the central insights of his work in The
                General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (Keynes 1936) as well as the follow up articles
                to the General Theory, ‘The General Theory of Employment’, ‘The “ex-ante” Theory of the Rate
                of Interest’, ‘Alternative Theories of the Rate of Interest’ Keynes (1937a, 1937b, 1937c) and, most
                importantly, How to Pay for the War Keynes (1940). The central insights of Keynes were that:
                  (a) There is no automatic adjustment mechanism in a market economy ensuring that it will return
                      quickly to a full employment equilibrium (even if all prices and wages are fully ﬂexible).
                  (b) Consumption and investment decisions are often made under conditions of pure uncertainty,
                      where there is no rational basis for the decision and therefore may be the result of hopes, fears
                      and imagined futures which have no basis in objective reality.
                  (c) Savings and investment are equilibrated by changes in investment, not interest rates.
                  (d) Long term interest rates are determined by the desire for liquidity and expectations about the
                      future.
                These insights have largely been lost from contemporary macroeconomic theory and policy, for
                reasons which will be discussed in future chapters. These insights are also very compatible with
                behavioural economics, and particularly the strand of behavioural economics referred to by Earl
                (2022) and Sent (2004) as the ‘Old Behavioural Economics’. Old Behavioural Economics is derived
                from the work of Simon (1955, 1956, 1979, 1991, 1996) and also includes the work on the theory of
                the ﬁrm such as Hall and Hitch (1939), Cyert and March (1963) and Richardson (1953, 1959, 1960).
                Simon recognised that the central axiom of economic theory (and policy), that decisions made by
                people and ﬁrms to rationally maximise utility or proﬁts was an impossibility. It was impossible
                1It should be emphasised that the focus of this work is neither to discuss ‘what Keynes really meant’, nor to suggest that
                 the work of Keynes is without error. There are however, a number of central, and almost self-evident, propositions in
                 his work which have not been incorporated into the body of modern macroeconomic theory, because they undermine
                 either the axioms or the overall vision of modern macroeconomic theory.
                                                                   1
               CHAPTER1. INTRODUCTION                                                                     2
               bothbecause the information required does not, and often could not possibly exist, and furthermore
               even if the information were to exist, humans do not have the cognitive capacity to process it all and
               (as orthodox economic theory assumes) examine all possible alternatives before taking a decision.
               He also developed an alternative decision theory, rooted in empirical work in psychology.
               Among the most important consequences of his work was the idea that consumers could not be
               maximising intertemporal utility, using interest rates to discount future costs and beneﬁts. Indeed,
               as will be seen in later chapters, there is a wealth of empirical evidence suggesting that individuals
               do not, and cannot apply consistent discount factors to the future and take decisions maximising
               intertemporal utility. In practice this means that the choice of what goods and services to consume,
               and how much to consume and to save, will be dominated by a few rules which produce satisfactory
               (but not optimal) outcomes. Simon referred to such decision rules as procedural rationality, as
               opposedtothesubstantive rationality of orthodox economics. It will beseen that the way individuals
               develop such rules means that their decisions may be very diﬀerent those that would have resulted
               from intertemporal utility maximisation.
               Cyert and March, Richardson and others applied these insights to the theory of the ﬁrm, and again
               demonstrated that ﬁrms cannot simply maximise proﬁts because the information and knowledge
               required simply do not exist. The ﬁrms have to use policies and procedures which produce sat-
               isfactory results. It is impossible to know whether these would have been optimal. This applies
               particularly when developing new products or opening new markets. Demand curves and marginal
               costs are unknown in such cases, and will change with as the product enters a new market. New
               investment is inevitably a question of taking a decision under extreme uncertainty and with very
               little reliable knowledge. As Keynes (1936) says:
                    “The outstanding fact is the extreme precariousness of the basis of knowledge on which
                    our estimates of prospective yield have to be made.  Our knowledge of the factors
                    which will govern the yield of an investment some years hence is usually very slight
                    and often negligible. If we speak frankly, we have to admit that our basis of knowledge
                    for estimating the yield ten years hence of a railway, a copper mine, a textile factory,
                    the goodwill of a patent medicine, an Atlantic liner, a building in the City of London
                    amounts to little and sometimes to nothing; or even ﬁve years hence.”
               In the modern context we could just as well argue that we have little or no idea about the changes to
               the economy and society of the widespread adoption of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, how electric battery
               technology will evolve, whether USA will have become an inward looking authoritarian regime
               isolated from the rest of the world, or whether there will be further major wars over the next
               ten years. All of these will have enormous impacts on the return of investments, and we have no
               knowledge of the probabilities of these events nor of their impact on economy and society. One of
               the central themes of this book is that the returns to investment in physical capital are extremely
               uncertain, and so the model in which entrepreneurs compare ‘the interest rate’ to the returns to
               investment to determine whether it is viable, may be of limited use in explaining levels of investment.
               This article looks at both the technical and political economy aspects of ﬁscal and monetary policy
               to understand how and why this transformation took place. It is argued that the use of monetary
               policy as the principal instrument to control inﬂation, is technically ﬂawed while the experience of
               monetary policy over the past 30 or so years shows how the political economy issues that led to the
               decline of ﬁscal policy as the main instrument of demand management can now be overcome, so as
               to achieve eﬀective macroeconomic management, consistent with a dynamic and fair economy.
           CHAPTER1. INTRODUCTION                                              3
           1.2  Methodology
